ORRA: A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Hughobert , Count of Aldenberg.

Glottenbal , his son.

Theobald of Falkenstein , a nobleman of reduced fortune, and co-burgher of Basle.

Rudigere , a knight, and commander of one of the free companies returned from the wars, and bastard of a branch of the family of Aldenberg .

Hartman , friend of Theobald , and Banneret of Basle.

Urston , a confessor.

Franko , chief of a band of outlaws.

Maurice , an agent of Rudigere ' s.

Soldiers, vassals, outlaws, &c.

WOMEN Orra , heiress of another branch of the family of Aldenberg , and ward to Hughobert .

Eleanora , wife to Hughobert .

Cathrina , lady attending on Orra .

Alice , lady attending on Orra .



Scene , Switzerland, in the canton of Basle, and afterwards on the borders of the Black Forest in Suabia. Time, towards the end of the th century.
ACT I. SCENE I.
An open space before the walls of a castle, with wild mountains beyond it; enter Glottenbal , armed as from the lists, but bare-headed and in disorder, and his arms soiled with earth or sand, which an Attendant is now and then brushing off, whilst another follows bearing his helmet; with him enters Maurice , followed by Rudigere , who is also armed, and keeps by himself, pacing to and fro at the bottom of the stage, whilst the others come forward.
Glot.

 speaking as he enters, loud and boastingly .
 Ay, let him triumph in his paltry
 honours,


 
   Won by mere trick and accident. Good faith!
   It were a shame to call it strength or skill,
   Were it not, Rudigere?


 Calling to Rudigere , who answers not.
Maur.
   His brow is dark, his tongue is lock'd, my lord;
   There come no words from him; he bears it not
   So manfully as thou dost, noble Glottenbal.

Glot.
   Fy on't! I mind it not.

Maur.
   And wherefore shouldst thou? This same Theobald,
   Count and co-burgher—mixture most unseemly
   Of base and noble,—know we not right well
   What powers assist him? Mark'd you not, my lord,
   How he did turn him to the witchy north,
   When first he mounted; making his fierce steed,
   That paw'd and rear'd and shook its harness'd neck
   In generous pride, bend meekly to the earth
   Its maned crest, like one who made obeisance?

Glot.
   Ha! didst thou really see it?

Maur.
                                            Yes, brave Glottenbal,
   I did right truly; and besides myself,
   Many observ'd it.

Glot.
                                            Then 'tis manifest
   How all this foil hath been. Who e'er before
   Saw one with such advantage of the field,
   Lose it so shamefully? By my good fay!
   Barring foul play and other dev'lish turns,
   I'd keep my courser's back with any lord,
   Or knight, or squire, that e'er bestrode a steed.
   Thinkst thou not, honest Maurice, that I could?

Maur.
   Who doubts it, good my lord? This Falkenstein
   Is but a clown to you.

Glot.
                                            Well let him boast.
   Boasting I scorn; but I will shortly show him
   What these good arms, with no foul play against them,
   Can honestly achieve.

Maur.
   Yes, good my lord; but choose you well your day:
   A moonless Friday luck did never bring
   To honest combatant.

Glot.
   Ha! blessing on thee! I ne'er thought of this:
   Now it is clear how our mischance befell.
   Be sure thou tell to every one thou meetst,
   Friday and a dark moon suit Theobald.
   Ho there! Sir Rudigere! hearst thou not this?

Rud.

 as he goes off, aside to Maur .
   Flatter the fool awhile and let me go,
   I cannot join thee now.


 Exit.
Glot.

 looking after Rud .
   Is he so crestfallen?

Maur.
   He lacks your noble spirit.

Glot.
                                            Fye upon't!
   I heed it not. Yet, by my sword and spurs!
   'Twas a foul turn, that for my rival earn'd
   A branch of victory from Orra's hand.

Maur.
   Ay, foul indeed! My blood boil'd high to see it.
   Look where he proudly comes.


Enter Theobald armed, with attendants, having a green sprig stuck in his helmet.
Glot.

 going up to Theobald .
   Comest thou to face me so? Audacious burgher!
   The Lady Orra's favour suits thee not,
   Though for a time thou hast upon me gain'd
   A seeming 'vantage.

Theo.
   A seeming 'vantage!—Then it is not true,
   That thou, unhors'd, layst rolling in the dust,
   Asking for quarter?—Let me crave thy pardon;
   Some strange delusion hung upon our sight
   That we believed it so.

Glot.
                                            Off with thy taunts!
   And pull that sprig from its audacious perch:
   The favour of a dame too high for thee.

Theo.
   Too high indeed; and hadst thou also added,
   Too good, too fair, I had assented to it.
   Yet, be it known unto your courteous worth,
   That were this spring a queen's gift, or receiv'd
   From the brown hand of some poor mountain maid;
   Yea, or bestow'd upon my rambling head,
   As in the hairy sides of browsing kid
   The wild rose sticks a spray, unpriz'd, unbidden,
   I would not give it thee.

Glot.
   Dost thou so face me out? Then I will have it.


 Snatching at it with rage.

Enter Hartman .
Hart.

 separating them .
   What! Malice! after fighting in the lists
   As noble courteous knights!

Glot.

 to Hartman .
   Go, paltry banneret! Such friends as thou
   Become such lords as he, whose ruin'd state
   Seeks the base fellowship of restless burghers;
   Thinking to humble still, with envious spite,
   The great and noble houses of the land.
   I know ye well, and I defy you both,
   With all your damned witchery to boot.


 Exit grumbling, followed by Maurice , &c. Manent Theopald and Hartman .
Theo.
   How fierce the creature is, and full of folly!
   Like a shent cur to his own door retired,
   That bristles up his furious back, and there
   Each passenger annoys.—And this is he,
   Whom sordid and ambitious Hughobert,
   The guardian in the selfish father sunk,
   Destines for Orra's husband.—O foul shame!
   The carrion-crow and royal eagle join'd,
   Make not so cross a match.—But thinkst thou, Hartman,
   She will submit to it?



 
Hart.
   That may be as thou pleasest, Falkenstein.

Theo.
   Away with mockery!

Hart.
                                            I mock thee not.

Theo.
   Nay, banneret, thou dost, Saving this favour,
   Which every victor in these listed combats
   From ladies' hands receives, nor then regards
   As more than due and stated courtesy,
   She ne'er hath honour'd me with word or look
   Such hope to warrant.

Hart.
                                            Wait not thou for looks.

Theo.
   Thou wouldst not have me to a dame like this,
   With rich domains and titled rights encompass'd,
   These simple limbs, girt in their soldier's gear,
   My barren hills and ruin'd tower present,
   And say, “Accept—these will I nobly give
   In fair exchange for thee and all thy wealth.”
   No, Rudolph Hartman, woo the maid thyself,
   If thou hast courage for it.

Hart.
   Yes, Theobald of Falkenstein, I will,
   And win her too; but all for thy behoof.
   And when I do present, as thou hast said,
   Those simple limbs, girt in their soldier's gear,
   Adding thy barren hills and ruin'd tower,
   With some few items more of gen'rous worth,
   And native sense and manly fortitude,
   I'll give her in return for all that she
   Or any maid can in such barter yield,
   Its fair and ample worth.

Theo.
                                            So dost thou reckon.

Hart.
   And so will Orra. Do not shake thy head.
   I know the maid: for still she has receiv'd me
   As one who knew her noble father well,
   And in the bloody field in which he died
   Fought by his side, with kind familiarity:
   And her stern guardian, viewing these grey hairs
   And this rough visage with no jealous eye
   Hath still admitted it.—I'll woo her for thee.

Theo.
   I do in truth believe thou meanst me well.

Hart.
   And this is all thou sayst? Cold frozen words!
   What has bewitch'd thee, man? Is she not fair?

Theo.
   O fair indeed as woman need be form'd
   To please and be belov'd! Though, to speak honestly,
   I've fairer seen; yet such a form as Orra's
   For ever in my busy fancy dwells,
   Whene'er I think of wiving my lone state.
   It is not this; she has too many lures;
   Why wilt thou urge me on to meet her scorn?
   I am not worthy of her.

Hart.

 pushing him away with gentle anger .
   Go to! I praised thy modesty short-wnile,
   And now with dull and senseless perseverance,
   Thon wouldst o'erlay me with it. Go thy ways!
   If through thy fault, thus shrinking from the onset,
   She should with this untoward cub be match'd,
   'Twill haunt thy conscience like a damning sin,
   And may it gnaw thee shrewdly!


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A small apartment in the castle. Enter Rudigere musing gloomily, and muttering to himself some time before he speaks aloud.
Rud.
   No, no; it is to formless air dissolv'd,
   This cherish'd hope, this vision of my brain!

 Pacing to and fro, and then stopping and musing as before.
   I daily stood contrasted in her sight
   With an ungainly fool; and when she smiled,
   Methought—But wherefore still upon this thought,
   Which was perhaps but a delusion then,
   Brood I with ceaseless torment? Never, never!
   O never more on me, from Orra's eye,
   Approving glance shall light, or gentle look!
   This day's disgrace mars all my goodly dreams.
   My path to greatness is at once shut up.
   Still in the dust my grov'ling fortune lies.

 Striking his breast in despair.
   Tame thine aspiring spirit, luckless wretch!
   There is no hope for thee!
   And shall I tame it? No, by saints and devils!
   The laws have cast me off from every claim
   Of house and kindred, and within my veins
   Turn'd noble blood to baseness and reproach:
   I'll cast them off: why should they be to me
   A bar, and no protection?

 Pacing again to and fro, and muttering low for some time before he speaks aloud .
   Ay; this may still within my toils enthral her;
   This is the secret weakness of her mind
   On which I'll clutch my hold.


Enter Cathrina behind him, laying her hand upon him.
Cath.
                                            Ha! speakst thou to thyself?

Rud.

 starting .
   I did not speak.

Cath.
   Thou didst; thy busy mind gave sound to thoughts
   Which thou didst utter with a thick harsh voice,
   Like one who speaks in sleep. Tell me their meaning.

Rud.
   And dost thou so presume? Be wise; be humble.

 After a pause.
   Has Orra oft of late requested thee
   To tell her stories of the restless dead;
   Of spectres rising at the midnight watch
   By the lone trav'ller's bed?

Cath.
   Wherefore of late dost thou so oft inquire
   Of what she says and does?

Rud.
   Be wise, and answer what I ask of thee;
   This is thy duty now.



 
Cath.
   Alas, alas! I know that one false step
   Has o'er me set a stern and ruthless master.

Rud.
   No, madam; 'tis thy grave and virtuous seeming;
   Thy saint-like carriage, rigid and demure,
   On which thy high repute so long has stood,
   Endowing thee with right of censorship
   O'er every simple maid, whose cheerful youth
   Wears not so thick a mask, that o'er thee sets
   This ruthless master. Hereon rests my power:
   I might expose, and therefore I command thee.

Cath.
   Hush, hush! approaching steps!
                                            They'll find me here!
   I'll do whate'er thou wilt.

Rud.
   It is but Maurice: hie thee to thy closet,
   Where I will shortly come to thee. Be thou
   My faithful agent in a weighty matter,
   On which I now am bent, and I will prove
   Thy stay and shelter from the world's contempt.

Cath.
   Maurice to find me here! Where shall I hide me?

Rud.
   Nowhere, but boldly pass him as he enters.
   I'll find some good excuse; he will be silent:
   He is my agent also.

Cath.
                                            Dost thou trust him?

Rud.
   Avarice his master is, as shame is thine:
   Therefore I trust to deal with both.—Away!


Enter Maurice , passing Cathrina as she goes out.
Maur.
   What, doth the grave and virtuous Cathrina
   Vouchsafe to give thee of her company?

Rud.
   Yes, rigid saint! she has bestow'd upon me
   Some grave advice to bear with pious meekness
   My late discomfiture.

Maur.
                                            Ay, and she call'd it,
   I could be sworn! heaven's judgment on thy pride.

Rud.
   E'en so: thou'st guess'd it.—Shall we to the ramparts
   And meet the western breeze?


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A spacious apartment. Enter Hughobert and Urston .
Hugh.

 speaking with angry gesticulation as he enters .
   I feed and clothe these drones, and in return
   They cheat, deceive, abuse me; nay, belike,
   Laugh in their sleeve the while. By their advice,
   This cursed tournay I proclaim'd; for still
   They puff'd me up with praises of my son—
   His grace, his skill in arms, his horsemanship—
   Count Falkenstein to him was but a clown—
   And so in Orra's eyes to give him honour,
   Full surely did I think—I'll hang them all:
   I'll starve them in a dungeon shut from light:
   I'll heap my boards no more with dainty fare
   To feed false flatterers.

Urst.
                                            That indeed were wise:
   But art thou sure, when men shall speak the truth,
   That thou wilt feed them for it? I but hinted
   In gentle words to thee, that Glottenbal
   Was praised with partial or affected zeal,
   And thou receiv'dst it angrily.

Hugh.
   Ay, true indeed: but thou didst speak of him
   As one bereft of all capacity.
   Now though, God wot! I look on his defects
   With no blind love, and even in my ire
   Will sometimes call him fool; yet ne'ertheless,
   He still has parts and talents, though obscur'd
   By some untoward failings.—Heaven be praised!
   He wants not strength at least and well turn'd limbs,
   Had they but taught him how to use them. Knaves!
   They have neglected him.
Enter Glottenbal , who draws back on seeing his father.

   Advance, young sir: art thou afraid of me,
   That thus thou shrinkest like a skulking thief
   To make disgrace the more apparent on thee?

Glot.
   Yes, call it then disgrace, or what you please;
   Had not my lance's point somewhat awry
   Glanced on his shield—

Hugh.
                                            E'en so; I doubt it not;
   Thy lance's point, and every thing about thee
   Hath glanced awry. Go, rid my house, I say,
   Of all those feasting flatterers that deceive thee;
   They harbour here no more: dismiss them quickly.

Glot.
   Do it yourself, my lord; you are, I trow,
   Angry enough to do it sharply.

Hugh.

 turning to Urston .
                                            Faith!
   He gibes me fairly here; there's reason in't;
   Fools speak not thus.
 To Glottenbal .
Go to ! if I am angry,
   Thou art a graceless son to tell me so.

Glot.
   Have you not bid me still to speak the truth?

Hugh.

 to Urston .
   Again thou hearst he makes an apt reply.

Urst.
   He wants not words.

Hugh.
                                            Nor meaning neither, father.
Enter Eleanora .

   Well, dame; where hast thou been?

El.
                                            I came from Orra.

Hugh.
   Hast thou been pleading in our son's excuse?
   And how did she receive it?

El.
   I tried to do it, but her present humour
   Is jest and merriment. She is behind me,


 
   Stopping to stroke a hound, that in the corridor
   Came to her fawningly to be caress'd.

Glot.

 listening .
   Ay, she is coming; light and quick her steps;
   So sound they when her spirits are unruly:
   But I am bold; she shall not mock me now.
Enter Orra , tripping gaily, and playing with the folds of her scarf.

   Methinks you trip it briskly, gentle dame.

Orra.
   Does it offend you, noble knight?

Glot.
                                            Go to!
   I know your meaning. Wherefore smile you so?

Orra.
   Because, good sooth! with tired and aching sides
   I have not power to laugh.

Glot.
   Full well I know why thou so merry art.
   Thou thinkst of him to whom thou gav'st that sprig
   Of hopeful green, his rusty casque to grace,
   While at thy feet his honour'd glave he laid.

Orra.
   Nay, rather say, of him, who at my feet,
   From his proud courser's back, more gallantly
   Laid his most precious self: then stole away,
   Through modesty, unthank'd, nor left behind
   Of all his gear that flutter'd in the dust,
   Or glove, or band, or fragment of torn hose,
   For dear remembrance-sake, that in my sleeve
   I might have placed it. O! thou wrongst me much,
   To think my merriment a ref'rence hath
   To any one but him.


 Laughing. 
El.
   Nay, Orra; these wild fits of uncurb'd laughter,
   Athwart the gloomy tenor of your mind,
   As it has low'r'd of late, so keenly cast,
   Unsuited seem and strange.

Orra.
   O nothing strange, my gentle Eleanora!
   Didst thou ne'er see the swallow's veering breast,
   Winging the air beneath some murky cloud
   In the sunn'd glimpses of a stormy day,
   Shiver in silv'ry brightness:
   Or boatman's oar, as vivid lightning flash
   In the faint gleam, that like a spirit's path
   Tracks the still waters of some sullen lake:
   Or lonely tower, from its brown mass of woods,
   Give to the parting of a wintry sun
   One hasty glance in mockery of the night
   Closing in darkness round it? — Gentle friend!
   Chide not her mirth, who was sad yesterday,
   And may be so to-morrow.

Glot.
   And wherefore art thou sad, unless it is
   From thine own wayward humour? Other dames,
   Were they so courted, would be gay and happy.

Orra.
   Wayward it needs must be, since I am sad
   When such perfection woos me.
                                            Pray, good Glottenbal,
   How didst thou learn with such a wondrous grace
   So high in air to toss thine armed heels,
   And clutch with outspread hands the slipp'ry sand?
   I was the more amaz'd at thy dexterity,
   As this, of all thy many gallant feats
   Before-hand promised, most modestly
   Thou didst forbear to mention.

Glot.
                                            Gibe away!
   I care not for thy gibing. With fair lists,
   And no black arts against me—

Hugh.

 advancing angrily from the bottom of the stage to Glottenbal .
                                            Hold thy peace!

 To Orra .
   And, madam, be at least somewhat restrain'd
   In your unruly humour.

Orra.
   Pardon, my lord; I knew not you were near me.
   My humour is unruly; with your leave,
   I will retire till I have curb'd it better.

 To Eleanora .
   I would not lose your company, sweet countess.

El.
   We'll go together, then.


 Exeunt Orra and Eleanora . Manet Hughobert ; who paces angrily about the stage, while Glottenbal stands on the front, thumping his legs with his sheathed rapier.
Hugh.
   There is no striving with a forward girl,
   Nor pushing on a fool. My harass'd life
   Day after day more irksome grows. Curs'd bane!
   I'll toil no more for this untoward match.


Enter Rudigere , stealing behind, and listening.
Rud.
   You are disturb'd, my lord.

Hugh.
   What, is it thou? I am disturb'd in sooth.

Rud.
   Ay, Orra has been here; and some light words
   Of girlish levity have mov'd you. How!
   Toil for this match no more! What else remains,
   If this should be abandon'd, noble Aldenberg,
   That can be worth your toil?

Hugh.
   I'll match the cub elsewhere.

Rud.
   What call ye matching?

Hugh.
   Surely for him some other virtuous maid
   Of high descent, though not so richly dower'd,
   May be obtain'd.

Rud.
                                            Within your walls, perhaps,
   Some waiting gentlewoman, who perchance
   May be some fifty generations back
   Descended from a king, he will himself
   Ere long obtain, without your aid, my lord.

Hugh.
   Thou mak'st me mad! the dolt! the senseless dolt!
   What can I do for him? I cannot force
   A noble maid entrusted to my care:
   I, the sole guardian of her helpless youth!

Rud.
   That were indeed unfit; but there are means
   To make her yield consent.

Hugh.
   Then by my faith, good friend, I'll call thee wizard,
   If thou canst find them out. What means already,


 
   Short of compulsion, have we left untried?
   And now the term of my authority
   Wears to its close.

Rud.
   I know it well; and therefore powerful means,
   And of quick operation, must be sought.

Hugh.
   Speak plainly to me.

Rud.
                                            I've watch'd her long.
   I've seen her cheek, flush'd with the rosy glow
   Of jocund spirits, deadly pale become
   At tale of nightly sprite or apparition,
   Such as all hear, 'tis true, with greedy ears,
   Saying, “Saints save us!” but forget as quickly.
   I've marked her long; she has with all her shrewdness
   And playful merriment, a gloomy fancy,
   That broods within itself on fearful things.

Hugh.
   And what doth this avail us?

Rud.
                                            Hear me out.
   Your ancient castle in the Suabian forest
   Hath, as too well you know, belonging to it,
   Or false or true, frightful reports. There hold her
   Strictly confin'd in sombre banishment;
   And doubt not but she will, ere long, full gladly
   Her freedom purchase at the price you name.

Hugh.
   On what pretence can I confine her there?
   It were most odious.

Rud.
                                            Can pretence be wanting?
   Has she not favour shown to Theobald,
   Who in your neighbourhood, with his sworn friend
   The Banneret of Basle, suspiciously
   Prolongs his stay? A poor and paltry count,
   Unmect to match with her. And want ye then
   A reason for removing her with speed
   To some remoter quarter? Out upon it!
   You are too scrupulous.

Hugh.
   Thy scheme is good, but cruel.


 Glottenbal has been drawing nearer to them, and attending to the last part of their discourse.
Glot.
   O much I like it, dearly wicked Rudigere!
   She then will turn her mind to other thoughts
   Than scornful gibes at me.

Hugh.
   I to her father swore I would protect her:
   I must fulfil his will.

Rud.
   And, in that will, her father did desire
   She might be match'd with this your only son:
   Therefore you're firmly bound all means to use
   That may the end attain.

Hugh.
   Walk forth with me, we'll talk of this at large.


 Exeunt Hugh . and Rud . Manet Glottenbal , who comes forward from the bottom of the stage with the action of a knight advancing to the charge.
Glot.
   Yes, thus it is; I have the sleight o't now;
   And were the combat yet to come, I'd show them
   I'm not a whit behind the bravest knight,
   Cross luck excepted.


Enter Maurice .
Maur.
   My lord, indulge us of your courtesy.

Glot.
   In what, I pray?

Maur.
                                            Did not Fernando tell you?
   We are all met within our social bower;
   And I have wager'd on your head, that none
   But you alone, within the count's domains,
   Can to the bottom drain the chased horn.
   Come do not linger here when glory calls you.

Glot.
   Thinkst thou that Theobald could drink so stoutly?

Maur.
   He, paltry chief! he herds with sober burghers;
   A goblet, half its size, would conquer him.


 Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A garden with trees, and shrubs, &c. Orra, Theobald , and Hartman , are discovered in a shaded walk at the bottom of the stage, speaking in dumb show, which they cross, disappearing behind the trees; and are presently followed by Cathrina and Alice , who continue walking there. Orra, Theo ., and Hart . then appear again, entering near the front of the stage.
Orra

 talking to Hart . as she enters .
   And so, since fate has made me, woe the day!
   That poor and good-for-nothing, helpless being.
   Woman yclept, I must consign myself
   With all my lands and rights into the hands
   Of some proud man, and say, “Take all, I pray,
   And do me in return the grace and favour
   To be my master.”

Hart.
   Nay, gentle lady, you constrain my words.
   And load them with a meaning harsh and foreign
   To what they truly bear.—A master! No;
   A valiant gentle mate, who in the field
   Or in the council will maintain your right:
   A noble, equal partner.

Orra

 shaking her head .
                                            Well I know,
   In such a partnership, the share of power
   Allotted to the wife. See, noble Falkenstein
   Hath silent been the while, nor spoke one word
   In aid of all your specious arguments.

 To Theo .
   What's your advice, my lord?

Theo.
                                            Ah, noble Orra,
   'Twere like self-murder to give honest counsel;
   Then urge me not. I frankly do confess
   I should be more heroic than I am.

Orra.
   Right well I see thy head approves my plan,
   And by-and-bye so will thy gen'rous heart.
   In short, I would, without another's leave,
   Improve the low condition of my peasants,
   And cherish them in peace. E'en now, methinks,
   Each little cottage of my native vale


 
   Swells out its earthen sides, up-heaves its roof,
   Like to a hillock mov'd by lab'ring mole,
   And with green trail-weeds clamb'ring up its walls,
   Roses and ev'ry gay and fragrant plant,
   Before my fancy stands, a fairy bower:
   Ay, and within it too do fairies dwell.

 Looking playfully through her fingers like a show-glass.
   Peep through its wreathed window, if indeed
   The flowers grow not too close, and there within
   Thou'lt see some half a dozen rosy brats
   Eating from wooden bowls their dainty milk;—
   Those are my mountain elves. Seest thou not
   Their very forms distinctly?

Theo.
   Distinctly; and most beautiful the sight!
   A sight which sweetly stirreth in the heart
   Feelings that gladden and ennoble it,
   Dancing like sun-beams on the rippled sea;
   A blessed picture! Foul befall the man
   Whose narrow, selfish soul would shade or mar it!

Hart.
   To this right heartily I say Amen!
   But if there be a man whose gen'rous soul

 Turning to Orra .
   Like ardour fills; who would with thee pursue
   Thy gen'rous plan; who would his harness don—

Orra

 putting her hand on him in gentle interruption .
   Nay, valiant banneret, who would, an't please you,
   His harness doff: all feuds, all strife forbear,
   All military rivalship, all lust
   Of added power, and live in steady quietness,
   A mild and fost'ring lord. Know you of one
   That would so share my task?—You answer not;
   And your brave friend, methinks, casts on the ground
   A thoughtful look: wots he of such a lord?


 To Theo .
Theo.
   Wot I of such a lord? No, noble Orra,
   I do not; nor does Hartman, though perhaps
   His friendship may betray his judgment. No;
   None such exist: we are all fierce, contentious,
   Restless and proud, and prone to vengeful feuds;
   The very distant sound of war excites us,
   Like the curb'd courser list'ning to the chase,
   Who paws, and frets, and bites the rein. Trust none
   To cross thy gentle, but most princely purpose,
   Who hath on head a circling helmet worn,
   Or ever grasp'd a glave.—But ne'ertheless
   There is—I know a man.— Might I be bold?

Orra.
   Being so honest, boldness is your right.

Theo.
   Permitted then, I'll say, I know a man,
   Though most unworthy Orra's lord to be,
   Who, as her champion, friend, devoted soldier,
   Might yet commend himself; and, so received,
   Who would at her command, for her defence
   His sword right proudly draw. An honour'd sword,
   Like that which at the gate of Paradise
   From steps profane the blessed region guarded.

Orra.
   Thanks to the gen'rous knight! I also know
   The man thou wouldst commend; and when my state
   Such service needeth, to no sword but his
   Will I that service owe.

Theo.
   Most noble Orra! greatly is he honour'd;
   And will not murmur that a higher wish,
   Too high, and too presumptuous, is repress'd.


 Kissing her hand with great respect.
Orra.
   Nay, Rudolph Hartman, clear that cloudy brow,
   And look on Falkenstein and on myself
   As two co-burghers of thy native city
   For such I mean ere long to be, and claiming
   From thee, as cadets from an elder born,
   Thy cheering equal kindness.


Enter a Servant.
Serv.
   The count is now at leisure to receive
   The lord of Falkenstein, and Rudolph Hartman.

Hart.
   We shall attend him shortly.
 Exit servant.

 Aside to Theo .

                                            Must we now
   Our purpos'd suit to some pretended matter
   Of slighter import change?

Theo.

 to Hart . aside .
                                            Assuredly.—
   Madam, I take my leave with all devotion.

Hart.
   I with all friendly wishes.


 Exeunt Theo . and Hart. Cathrina and Alice now advance through the shrubs, &c. at the bottom of the stage, while Orra remains, wrapped in thought, on the front.
Cath.
   Madam, you're thoughtful; something occupies
   Your busy mind.

Orra.
   What was't we talk'd of, when the worthy banneret
   With Falkenstein upon our converse broke?

Cath.
   How we should spend our time, when in your castle
   You shall maintain your state in ancient splendour,
   With all your vassals round you.

Orra.
   Ay, so it was.

Al.
                                            And you did say, my lady,
   It should not be a cold unsocial grandeur:
   That you would keep, the while, a merry house.

Orra.
   O doubt it not! I'll gather round my board
   All that heav'n sends to me of way-worn folks,
   And noble travellers, and neighb'ring friends,
   Both young and old. Within my ample hall,
   The worn-out man of arms of whom too many,
   Nobly descended, rove like reckless vagrants
   From one proud chieftain's castle to another,
   Half chid, half honour'd shall o' tiptoe tread,
   Tossing his grey locks from his wrinkled brow
   With cheerful freedom, as he boasts his feats
   Of days gone by.—Music we'll have; and oft
   The bick'ring dance upon our oaken floors
   Shall, thund'ring loud, strike on the distant ear
   Of'nighted trav'llers, who shall gladly bend
   Their doubtful footsteps tow'rds the cheering din.
   Solemn, and grave, and cloister'd, and demure
   We shall not be. Will this content ye, damsels?



 
Al.
   O passing well! 'twill be a pleasant life;
   Free from all stern subjection; blithe and fanciful;
   We'll do whate'er we list.

Cath.
   That right and prudent is, I hope thou meanest.

Al.
   Why ever so suspicious and so strict?
   How couldst thou think I had another meaning?

 To Orra .
   And shall we ramble in the woods full oft
   With hound and horn?—that is my dearest joy.

Orra.
   Thou runn'st me fast, good Alice. Do not doubt
   This shall be wanting to us. Ev'ry season
   Shall have its suited pastime: even Winter
   In its deep noon, when mountains piled with snow,
   And chok'd up valleys from our mansion bar
   All entrance, and nor guest, nor traveller
   Sounds at our gate; the empty hall forsaking,
   In some warm chamber, by the crackling fire
   We'll hold our little, snug, domestic court,
   Plying our work with song and tale between.

Cath.
   And stories too, I ween, of ghosts and spirits,
   And things unearthly, that on Michael's eve
   Rise from the yawning tombs.

Orra.
   Thou thinkest then one night o'th' year is truly
   More horrid than the rest.

Cath.
   Perhaps 'tis only silly superstition:
   But yet it is well known the count's brave father
   Would rather on a glacier's point have lain,
   By angry tempests rock'd, than on that night
   Sunk in a downy couch in Brunier's castle.

Orra.
   How, pray? What fearful thing did scare him so?

Cath.
   Hast thou ne'er heard the story of Count Hugo,
   His ancestor, who slew the hunter-knight?

Orra

 eagerly .
   Tell it, I pray thee.

Al.
   Cathrina, tell it not; it is not right:
   Such stories ever change her cheerful spirits
   To gloomy pensiveness; her rosy bloom
   To the wan colour of a shrouded corse.

 To Orra .
   What pleasure is there, lady, when thy hand,
   Cold as the valley's ice, with hasty grasp
   Seizes on her who speaks, while thy shrunk form
   Cow'ring and shiv'ring stands with keen turn'd ear
   To catch what follows of the pausing tale?

Orra.
   And let me cow'ring stand, and be my touch
   The valley's ice: there is a pleasure in it.

Al.
   Sayst thou indeed there is a pleasure in it?

Orra.
   Yea, when the cold blood shoots through every vein:
   When every pore upon my shrunken skin
   A knotted knoll becomes, and to mine ears
   Strange inward sounds awake, and to mine eyes
   Rush stranger tears, there is a joy in fear.

 Catching hold of Cathrina .
   Tell it, Cathrina, for the life within me
   Beats thick, and stirs to hear
   He slew the hunter-knight?

Cath.
   Since I must tell it, then, the story goes
   That grim Count Aldenberg, the ancestor
   Of Hughobert, and also of yourself,
   From hatred or from envy, to his castle
   A noble knight, who hunted in the forest,
   Well the Black Forest named, basely decoy'd,
   And there, within his chamber, murder'd him—

Orra.
   Merciful Heaven! and in my veins there runs
   A murderer's blood. Saidst thou not, murder'd him?

Cath.
   Ay; as he lay asleep, at dead of night.

Orra.
   A deed most horrible!

Cath.
   It was on Michael's eve; and since that time,
   The neighb'ring hinds oft hear the midnight yell
   Of spectre-hounds, and see the spectre shapes
   Of huntsmen on their sable steeds, with still
   A noble hunter riding in their van
   To cheer the chase, shown by the moon's pale beams,
   When wanes its horn in long October nights.

Orra.
   This hath been often seen?

Cath.
                                            Ay, so they say.
   But, as the story goes, on Michael's eve,
   And on that night alone of all the year,
   The hunter-knight himself, having a horn
   Thrice sounded at the gate, the castle enters;
   And, in the very chamber where he died,
   Calls on his murd'rer, or in his default
   Some true descendant of his house, to loose
   His spirit from its torment; for his body
   Is laid i' the earth unbless'd, and none can tell
   The spot of its interment.

Orra.
   Call on some true descendant of his race!
   It were to such a fearful interview.
   But in that chamber, on that night alone—
   Hath he elsewhere to any of the race
   Appeared? or hath he power—

Al.
                                            Nay, nay, forbear:
   See how she looks.
 To Orra .
I fear thou art not well.

Orra.
   There is a sickly faintness come upon me.

Al.
   And didst thou say there is a joy in fear?

Orra.
   My mind of late has strange impressionsg ta'en.
   I know not how it is.

Al.
                                            A few nights since,
   Stealing o' tiptoe, softly through your chamber,
   Towards my own—

Orra.
   O heaven defend us! didst thou see aught there?

Al.
   Only your sleeping self. But you appear'd
   Distress'd and troubled in your dreams; and once
   I thought to wake you ere I left the chamber,
   But I forbore.

Orra.
                                            And glad I am thou didst.
   It is not dreams I fear; for still with me
   There is an indistinctness o'er them cast,
   Like the dull gloom of misty twilight, where
   Before mine eyes pass all incongruous things,
   Huge, horrible, and strange, on which I stare
   As idiots do upon this changeful world,


 
   With nor surprise nor speculation. No;
   Dreams I fear not: it is the dreadful waking,
   When, in deep midnight stillness, the roused fancy
   Takes up th' imperfect shadows of its sleep,
   Like a marr'd speech snatch'd from a bungler's mouth,
   Shaping their forms distinctively and vivid
   To visions horrible:—this is my bane;—
   It is the dreadful waking that I fear.

Al.
   Well, speak of other things. There in good time
   Your ghostly father comes with quicken'd steps,
   Like one who bears some tidings good or ill.
   Heaven grant they may be good!


Enter Urston .
Orra.
   Father, you seem disturb'd.

Urst.
   Daughter, I am in truth disturb'd. The count
   All o' the sudden, being much enraged
   That Falkenstein still lingers near these walls,
   Resolves to send thee hence, to be awhile
   In banishment detain'd, till on his son
   Thou lookst with better favour.

Orra.
                                            Ay, indeed!
   That is to say perpetual banishment:
   A sentence light or heavy, as the place
   Is sweet or irksome he would send me to.

Urst.
   He will contrive to make it, doubt him not,
   Irksome enough. Therefore I would advise thee
   To feign at least, but for a little time,
   A disposition to obey his wishes.
   He's stern, but not relentless; and his dame,
   The gentle Eleanor, will still befriend you,
   When fit occasion serves.

Orra.
                                            What saidst thou, father?
   To feign a disposition to obey!
   I did mistake thy words.

Urst.
                                            No, gentle daughter;
   So press'd, thou mayest feign and yet be blameless.
   A trusty guardian's faith with thee he holds not,
   And therefore thou art free to meet his wrongs
   With what defence thou hast.

Orra

 proudly .
   Nay, pardon me; I, with an unshorn crown,
   Must hold the truth in plain simplicity,
   And am in nice distinctions most unskilful.

Urst.
   Lady, have I deserv'd this sharpness? oft
   Thine infant hand has strok'd this shaven crown:
   Thou'st ne'er till now reproach'd it.

Orra

 bursting into tears .
   Pardon, O pardon me, my gentle Urston!
   Pardon a wayward child, whose eager temper
   Doth sometimes mar the kindness of her heart.
   Father, am I forgiven?


 Hanging on him. 
Urst.
                                            Thou art, thou art:
   Thou art forgiven; more than forgiven, my child.

Orra.
   Then lead me to the count, I will myself
   Learn his stern purpose.

Urst.
                                            In the hall he is,
   Seated in state, and waiting to receive you.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A spacious apartment, or baron's hall, with a chair of state. Hughobert, Eleanora , and Glottenbal enter near the front, speaking as they enter; and afterwards enter Vassals and Attendants, who range themselves at the bottom of the stage.
Hugh.
   Cease, dame! I will not hear; thou striv'st in vain
   With thy weak pleadings. Orra hence must go
   Within the hour, unless she will engage
   Her plighted word to marry Glottenbal.

Glot.
   Ay, and a mighty hardship, by the mass!

Hugh.
   I've summon'd her in solemn form before me,
   That these my vassals should my act approve,
   Knowing my right of guardianship; and also
   That her late father, in his dying moments,
   Did will she should be married to my son;
   Which will, she now must promise to obey,
   Or take the consequence.

El.
                                            But why so hasty?

Hugh.
   Why, sayst thou? Falkenstein still in these parts
   Lingers with sly intent. Even now he left me,
   After an interview of small importance,
   Which he and Hartman, as a blind pretence
   For seeing Orra, formally requested.
   I say again she must forthwith obey me,
   Or take the consequence of wayward will.

El.
   Nay, not for Orra do I now entreat
   So much as for thyself. Bethink thee well
   What honour thou shalt have, when it is known
   Thy ward from thy protecting roof was sent;
   Thou who shouldst be to her a friend, a father.

Hugh.
   But do I send her unprotected? No!
   Brave Rudigere conducts her with a band
   Of trusty spearmen. In her new abode
   She will be safe as here.

El.
                                            Ha! Rudigere!
   Putst thou such trust in him? Alas, my lord!
   His heart is full of cunning and deceit.
   Wilt thou to him the flower of all thy race
   Rashly intrust? O be advised, my lord!

Hugh.
   Thy ghostly father tells thee so, I doubt not.
   Another priest confesses Rudigere,
   And Urston likes him not. But canst thou think,
   With aught but honest purpose, he would chose
   From all her women the severe Cathrina,
   So strictly virtuous, for her companion?
   This puts all doubt to silence. Say no more,
   Else I shall think thou pleadst against my son,
   More with a step-dame's than a mother's feelings.



 
Glot.
   Ay, marry does she, father! And forsooth!
   Regards me as a fool. No marvel then
   That Orra scorns me; being taught by her,—
   How should she else?—So to consider me!

Hugh.

 to Glottenbal .
   Tut! hold thy tongue.

El.
   He wrongs me much, my lord.

Hugh.
   No more, for here she comes.


Enter Orra , attended by Urston, Alice and Cathrina , whilst Hughobert seats himself in his chair of state, the vassals, &c. ranging themselves on each side.
Hugh.

 to Orra .
   Madam and ward, placed under mine authority,
   And to my charge committed by my kinsman,
   Ulric of Aldenberg, thy noble father:
   Having all gentle means essay'd to win thee
   To the fulfilment of his dying will,
   That did decree his heiress should be married
   With Glottenbal my heir; I solemnly
   Now call upon thee, ere that rougher means
   Be used for this good end, to promise truly
   Thou wilt, within a short and stated time,
   Before the altar give thy plighted faith
   To this my only son. I wait thine answer.
   Orra of Aldenberg, wilt thou do this?

Orra.
   Count of the same, my lord and guardian,
   I will not.

Hugh.
                                            Have a care, thou froward maid!
   'Tis thy last opportunity: ere long
   Thou shalt, within a dreary dwelling pent,
   Count thy dull hours, told by the dead man's watch,
   And wish thou hadst not been so proudly wilful.

Orra.
   And let my dull hours by the dead man's watch
   Be told; yea, make me too the dead man's mate,
   My dwelling place the nailed coffin; still
   I would prefer it to the living lord
   Your goodness offers me.

Hugh.
                                            Art thou bewitch'd?
   Is he not young, well featured and well form'd?
   And dost thou put him in thy estimation
   With bones and sheeted clay?
   Beyond endurance is thy stubborn spirit.
   Right well thy father knew that all thy sex
   Stubborn and headstrong are; therefore, in wisdom,
   He vested me with power that might compel thee
   To what he will'd should be.

Orra.
                                            O not in wisdom!
   Say rather in that weak, but gen'rous faith,
   Which said to him, the cope of heaven would fall
   And smother in its cradle his swath'd babe,
   Rather than thou. his mate in arms, his kinsman,
   Who by his side in many a field had fought,
   Shouldst take advantage of his confidence
   For sordid ends.—
                                            My brave and noble father!
   A voice comes from thy grave and cries against it,
   And bids me to be bold. Thine awful form
   Rises before me,—and that look of anguish
   On thy dark brow!—O no! I blame thee not.

Hugh.
   Thou seemst beside thyself with such wild gestures
   And strangely-flashing eyes. Repress these fancies,
   And to plain reason listen. Thou hast said,
   For sordid ends I have advantage ta'en.
   Since thy brave father's death, by war and compact,
   Thou of thy lands hast lost a third; whilst I,
   By happy fortune, in my heir's behalf,
   Have doubled my domains to what they were
   When Ulric chose him as a match for thee.

Orra.
   O, and what speaketh this, but that my father
   Domains regarded not; and thought a man
   Such as the son should be of such a man
   As thou to him appear'dst, a match more honourable
   Than one of ampler state. Take thou from Glottenbal
   The largely added lands of which thou boastest,
   And put, in lieu thereof, into his stores
   Some weight of manly sense and gen'rous worth,
   And I will say thou keepst faith with thy friend:
   But as it is, although a king's domains
   Increas'd thy wealth, thou poorly wouldst deceive him.

Hugh.

 rising from his chair in anger .
   Now, madam, be all counsel on this matter
   Between us closed. Prepare thee for thy journey.

El.
   Nay, good my lord! consider.

Hugh.

 to Eleanora .
                                            What, again!
   Have I not said thou hast an alien's heart
   From me and mine. Learn to respect my will:
   —Be silent, as becomes a youthful dame.

Urst.
   For a few days may she not still remain?

Hugh.
   No, priest; not for an hour. It is my pleasure
   That she for Brunier's castle do set forth
   Without delay.

Orra

 with a faint starting movement .
                        In Brunier's castle!

Hugh.
                                            Ay;
   And doth this change the colour of thy cheek,
   And give thy alter'd voice a feebler sound?

 Aside to Glottenbal .
   She shrinks, now to her, boy; this is thy time.

Glot.

 to Orra .
   Unless thou wilt, thou needst not go at all.
   There is full many a maiden would right gladly
   Accept the terms we offer, and remain.

 A pause. 
   Wilt thou not answer me?

Orra.
                                            I heard thee not.—
   I heard thy voice, but not thy words. What saidst thou?

Glot.
   I say, there's many a maiden would right gladly
   Accept the terms we offer, and remain.


 
   The daughter of a king hath match'd ere now
   With mine inferior. We are link'd together
   As 'twere by right and natural property.
   And as I've said before I say again,
   I love thee too: what more couldst thou desire?

Orra.
   I thank thee for thy courtship, though uncouth;
   For it confirms my purpose: and my strength
   Grows as thou speakst, firm like the deep-bas'd rock.

 To Hughobert .
   Now for my journey when you will, my lord!
   I'm ready.

Hugh.
                                            Be it so! on thine own head
   Rest all the blame!

 Going from her.
                                            Perverse past all belief!

 Turning round to her sternly.
   Orra of Aldenberg, wilt thou obey me?

Orra.
   Count of that noble house, with all respect,
   Again I say I will not.


 Exit Hughobert in anger, followed by Glottenbal, Urston , &c. Manent anly Eleanora, Cathrina, Alice , and Orra , who keeps up with stately pride till Hughobert and all attendants are gone out, and then throwing herself into the arms of Eleanora , gives vent to her feelings.
El.
   Sweet Orra! be not so depress'd; thou goest
   For a short term, soon to return again;
   The banishment is mine, who stays behind.
   But I will beg of heaven with ceaseless prayers
   To have thee soon restored: and, when I dare,
   Will plead with Hughobert in thy behalf;
   He is not always stern.

Orra.
   Thanks, gentle friend! Thy voice to me doth ring
   Like the last tones of kindly nature; dearly
   In my remembrance shall they rest.—What sounds,
   What sights, what horrid intercourse I may,
   Ere we shall meet again, be doom'd to prove,
   High heaven alone doth know.—If that indeed
   We e'er shall meet again!


 Falls on her neck and weeps.
El.
   Nay, nay! come to my chamber. There awhile
   Compose your spirits. Be not so depress'd.
 Exeunt.

 Rudigere , who has appeared, during the last part of the above scene, at the bottom of the stage, half concealed, as if upon the watch, now comes forward, speaking as he advances.

   Hold firm her pride till fairly from these walls
   Our journey is begun; then fortune hail!
   Thy favours are secured.

 Looking off the stage.
   Ho, Maurice there!

Enter Maurice .
   My faithful Maurice, I would speak with thee.
   I leave thee here behind me; to thy care,
   My int'rests I commit; be it thy charge
   To counteract thy lady's influence,
   Who will entreat her lord the term to shorten
   Of Orra's absence, maiming thus my plan,
   Which must, belike, have time to be effected.
   Be vigilant, be artful; and be sure
   Thy services I amply will repay.

Maur.
   Ay, thou hast said so, and I have believ'd thee.

Rud.
   And dost thou doubt?

Maur.
                                            No; yet meantime, good sooth!
   If somewhat of thy bounty I might finger,
   'Twere well: I like to have some actual proof.
   Didst thou not promise it?

Rud.
                                            'Tis true I did,
   But other pressing calls have drain'd my means.

Maur.
   And other pressing calls my ebbing faith
   May also drain, and change my promis'd purpose.

Rud.
   Go to! I know thou art a greedy leech,
   Though ne'ertheless thou lov'st me.

 Taking a small case from his pocket, which he opens.
                                            Seest thou here?
   I have no coin; but look upon these jewels:
   I took them from a knight I slew in battle.
   When I am Orra's lord, thou shalt receive,
   Were it ten thousand crowns, whate'er their worth
   Shall by a skilful lapidary be
   In honesty esteem'd.


 Gives him the jewels.
Maur.
   I thank thee, but methinks their lustre's dim.
   I've seen the stones before upon thy breast
   In gala days, but never heard thee boast
   They were of so much value.

Rud.
   I was too prudent: I had lost them else.
   To no one but thyself would I entrust
   The secret of their value.


Enter Servant.
Serv.
   Sir Rudigere, the spearmen are without,
   Waiting your further orders, for the journey.

Rud.

 to servant .
   I'll come to them anon.

 Exit servant.
   Before I go, I'll speak to thee again.


 Exeunt severally.
ACT III. SCENE I
A forest with a half-ruined castle in the background, seen through the trees by moonlight. Franko and several Outlaws are discovered sitting on the ground, round a fire, with flagons, &c. by them, as if they had been drinking.
Song of several voices.    The chough and crow to roost are gone,
      The owl sits on the tree,


 
   The hush'd wind wails with feeble moan,
      Like infant charity.
   The wild-fire dances on the fen,
      The red star sheds its ray,
   Uprouse ye, then, my merry men!
      It is our op'ning day.

   Both child and nurse are fast asleep,
      And clos'd is every flower,
   And winking tapers faintly peep
      High from my lady's bower;
   Bewilder'd hinds with shorten'd ken
      Shrink on their murky way,
   Uprouse, ye, then, my merry men!
      It is our op'ning day.

   Nor board nor garner own we now,
      Nor roof nor latched door,
   Nor kind mate, bound by holy vow
      To bless a good man's store;
   Noon lulls us in a gloomy den,
      And night is grown our day,
   Uprouse ye, then, my merry men!
      And use it as ye may.

Franko

 to  st out. .
   How lik'st thou this, Fernando?

 st out.
   Well sung i' faith! but serving ill our turn,
   Who would all trav'llers and benighted folks
   Scare from our precincts. Such sweet harmony
   Will rather tempt invasion.

Franko.
   Fear not, for mingled voices, heard afar,
   Through glade and glen and thicket, stealing on
   To distant list'ners, seem wild-goblin-sounds;
   At which the lonely trav'ller checks his steed,
   Pausing with long-drawn breath and keen-turn'd ear,
   And twilight pilferers cast down in haste
   Their ill-got burthens, while the homeward hind
   Turns from his path, full many a mile about,
   Through bog and mire to grope his blund'ring way.
   Such, to the startled ear of superstition,
   Were seraph's song, could we like seraphs sing.


Enter  d outlaw, hastily.
 d out.
   Disperse ye diff'rent ways: we are undone.

Franko.
   How sayst thou, shrinking poltroon? we undone!
   Outlaw'd and ruin'd men, who live by daring!

 d out.
   A train of armed men, some noble dame
   Escorting so their scatter'd words discover'd
   As, unperceiv'd, I hung upon their rear,
   Are close at hand, and mean to pass the night
   Within the castle.

Franko.
                                            Some benighted travellers,
   Bold from their numbers, or who ne'er have heard
   The ghostly legend of this dreaded place.

 out.
   Let us keep close within our vaulted haunts;
   The way to which is tangled and perplex'd,
   And cannot be discover'd: with the morn
   They will depart.

Franko.
   Nay, by the holy mass! within those walls
   Not for a night must trav'llers quietly rest,
   Or few or many. Would we live securely,
   We must uphold the terrors of the place:
   Therefore, let us prepare our midnight rouse.
   See, from the windows of the castle gleam

 Lights seen from the castle.
   Quick passing lights, as though they moved within
   In hurried preparation; and that bell,

 Bell heard.
   Which from yon turret its shrill 'larum sends,
   Betokens some unwonted stir. Come, hearts!
   Be all prepared, before the midnight watch,
   The fiend-like din of our infernal chace
   Around the walls to raise.—Come; night advances.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A Gothic room in the castle, with the stage darkened. Enter Cathrina , bearing a light, followed by Orra .
Orra

 catching her by the robe and pulling her back .
   Advance no further: turn, I pray! This room
   More dismal and more ghastly seems than that
   Which we have left behind. Thy taper's light,
   As thus aloft thou wav'st it to and fro,
   The fretted ceiling gilds with feeble brightness;
   While over-head its carved ribs glide past
   Like edgy waves of a dark sea, returning
   To an eclipsed moon its sullen sheen.

Cath.
   To me it seems less dismal than the other.
   See, here are chairs around the table set,
   As if its last inhabitants had left it
   Scarcely an hour ago.


 Setting the light upon the table.
Orra.
   Alas! how many hours and years have past
   Since human forms around this table sat,
   Or lamp or taper on its surface gleam'd!
   Methinks I hear the sound of time long past
   Still murm'ring o'er us in the lofty void
   Of those dark arches, like the ling'ring voices
   Of those who long within their graves have slept.
   It was their gloomy home; now it is mine.
 Sits down, resting her arm upon the table, and covering her eyes with her hand.

Enter Rudigere , beckoning Cathrina to come to him; and speaks to her in a low voice at the corner of the stage.

   Go and prepare thy lady's chamber; why
   Dost thou for ever closely near her keep?



 
Cath.
   She charged me so to do.

Rud.
                                            I charge thee also
   With paramount authority, to leave her:
   I for awhile will take thy station here.
   Thou art not mad? Thou dost not hesitate?


 Fixing his eyes on her with a fierce threatening look, from which she shrinks. Exit Cath .
Orra.
   This was the home of bloody lawless power.
   The very air rests thick and heavily
   Where murder hath been done.

 Sighing heavily. 
   There is a strange oppression in my breast:
   Dost thou not feel a close unwholesome vapour?

Rud.
   No; ev'ry air to me is light and healthful,
   That with thy sweet and heavenly breath is mix'd.

Orra

 starting up .
   Thou here!
 Looking round. 
Cathrina gone?

Rud.
   Does Orra fear to be alone with one,
   Whose weal, whose being on her favour hangs?

Orra.
   Retire, Sir Knight. I choose to be alone.

Rud.
   And dost thou choose it, here, in such a place,
   Wearing so near the midnight hour?—Alas!
   How loath'd and irksome must my presence be!

Orra.
   Dost thou deride my weakness?

Rud.
                                            I deride it!
   No, noble maid! say rather that from thee
   I have a kindred weakness caught. In battle
   My courage never shrank, as my arm'd heel
   And crested helm do fairly testify:
   But now when midnight comes, I feel by sympathy,
   With thinking upon thee, fears rise within me
   I never knew before.

Orra

 in a softened kindlier voice .
                                            Ha! dost thou too
   Such human weakness own?

Rud.
                                            I plainly feel
   We are all creatures, in the wakeful hour
   Of ghastly midnight, form'd to cower together,
   Forgetting all distinctions of thé day,
   Beneath its awful and mysterious power.


 Stealing closer to her as he speaks, and putting his arms round her.
Orra

 breaking from him .
   I pray thee hold thy parley further off:
   Why dost thou press so near me?

Rud.
   And art thou so offended, lovely Orra?
   Ah! wherefore am I thus presumptuous deem'd?
   The blood that fills thy veins enriches mine;
   From the same stock we spring; though by that glance
   Of thy disdainful eye, too well I see
   My birth erroneously thou countest base.

Orra.
   Erroneously!

Rud.
                                            Yes, I will prove it so.
   Longer I'll not endure a galling wrong
   Which makes each word of tenderness that bursts
   From a full heart, bold and presumptuous seem,
   And severs us so far.

Orra.
                                            No, subtile snake!
   It is the baseness of thy selfish mind,
   Full of all guile, and cunning, and deceit,
   That severs us so far, and shall do ever.

Rud.
   Thou prov'st how far my passion will endure
   Unjust reproaches from a mouth so dear.

Orra.
   Out on hypocrisy! who but thyself
   Did Hughobert advise to send me hither?
   And who the jailor's hateful office holds
   To make my thraldom sure?

Rud.
   Upbraid me not for this: had I refused,
   One less thy friend had ta'en th' ungracious task.
   And, gentle Orra! dost thou know a man,
   Who might in ward all that his soul holds dear
   From danger keep, yet would the charge refuse,
   For that strict right such wardship doth condemn?
   O! still to be with thee; to look upon thee;
   To hear thy voice, makes even this place of horrors,—
   Where, as 'tis said, the spectre of a chief,
   Slain by our common grandsire, haunts the night,
   A paradise—a place where I could live
   In penury and gloom, and be most bless'd.
   Ah! Orra! if there's misery in thraldom,
   Pity a wretch who breathes but in thy favour:
   Who till he look'd upon that beauteous face,
   Was free and happy.—Pity me or kill me!


 Kneeling and catching hold of her hand.
Orra.
   Off, fiend! let snakes and vipers cling to me
   So thou dost keep aloof.

Rud.

 rising indignantly .
   And is my love with so much hatred met?
   Madam, beware lest scorn like this should change me
   E'en to the baleful thing your fears have fancied.

Orra.
   Dar'st thou to threaten me?

Rud.
   He, who is mad with love and gall'd with scorn,
   Dares any thing.—But O! forgive such words
   From one who rather, humbled at your feet,
   Would of that gentleness, that gen'rous pity,
   The native inmate of each female breast,
   Receive the grace on which his life depends.
   There was a time when thou didst look on me
   With other eyes.

Orra.
                                            Thou dost amaze me much.
   Whilst I believ'd thou wert an honest man,
   Being no fool, and an adventurous soldier,
   I look'd upon thee with good-will; if more
   Thou didst discover in my looks than this,
   Thy wisdom with thine honesty, in truth,
   Was fairly match'd.

Rud.
   Madam, the proud derision of that smile
   Deceives me not. It is the lord of Falkenstein,
   Who better skill'd than I in tournay-war,
   Though not in th' actual field more valiant found,
   Engrosses now your partial thoughts. And yet
   What may he boast which, in a lover's suit,
   I may not urge? He's brave, and so am I.


 
   In birth I am his equal; for my mother,
   As I shall prove, was married to Count Albert,
   My noble father, though for reasons tedious
   Here to be stated, still their secret nuptials
   Were unacknowledg'd, and on me hath fallen
   A cruel stigma which degrades my fortunes.
   But were I—O forgive th' aspiring thought!—
   But were I Orra's lord, I should break forth
   Like the unclouded sun, by all acknowledg'd
   As ranking with the highest in the land.

Orra.
   Do what thou wilt when thou art Orra's lord;
   But being as thou art, retire and leave me:
   I choose to be alone.


 Very proudly. 
Rud.
                                            Then be it so.
   Thy pleasure, mighty dame, I will not balk.
   This night, to-morrow's night, and every night,
   Shalt thou in solitude be left; if absence
   Of human beings can secure it for thee.

 Pauses and looks on her, while she seems struck and disturbed.
   It wears already on the midnight hour;
   Good night!

 Pauses again, she still more disturbed.
   Perhaps I understood too hastily
   Commands you may retract.

Orra

 recovering her state .
   Leave me, I say; that part of my commands
   I never can retract.

Rud.
                                            You are obey'd.


 Exit.
Orra

 paces up and down hastily for some time, then stops short, and after remaining a little while in a thoughtful posture .
   Can spirit from the tomb, or fiend from hell,
   More hateful, more malignant be than man—
   Than villanous man? Although to look on such,
   Yea, even the very thought of looking on them,
   Makes natural blood to curdle in the veins,
   And loosen'd limbs to shake,
   There are who have endur'd the visitation
   Of supernatural beings.—O forefend it!
   I would close couch me to my deadliest foe
   Rather than for a moment bear alone
   The horrors of the sight.
   Who's there? who's there?

 Looking round.
   Heard I not voices near? That door ajar
   Sends forth a cheerful light. Perhaps my women,
   Who now prepare my chamber. Grant it be!


 Exit, running hastily to a door from which a light is seen.
SCENE III.
A chamber, with a small bed or couch in it. Enter Rudigere and Cathrina , wrangling together.
Rud.
   I say begone, and occupy the chamber
   I have appointed for thee: here I'm fix'd,
   And here I pass the night.

Cath.
                                            Thou saidst my chamber
   Should be adjoining that which Orra holds?
   I know thy wicked thoughts: they meditate
   Some dev'lish scheme; but think not I'll abet it.

Rud.
   Thou wilt not!—angry, restive, simple fool!
   Dost thou stop short and say, “I'll go no further?”
   Thou, whom concealed shame hath bound so fast,—
   My tool,—my instrument?—Fulfil thy charge
   To the full bent of thy commission, else
   Thee, and thy bantling too, I'll from me cast
   To want and infamy.

Cath.
                                            O, shameless man!
   Thou art the son of a degraded mother
   As low as I am, yet thou hast no pity.

Rud.
   Ay, and dost thou reproach my bastardy
   To make more base the man who conquer'd thee,
   With all thy virtue, rigid and demure?
   Who would have thought less than a sovereign prince
   Could e'er have compass'd such achievement? Mean
   As he may be, thou'st given thyself a master,
   And must obey him.—Dost thou yet resist?
   Thou know'st my meaning.


 Tearing open his vest in vehemence of action.
Cath.
   Under thy vest a dagger!—Ah! too well,
   I know thy meaning, cruel, ruthless man!

Rud.
   Have I discovered it?—I thought not of it:
   The vehemence of gesture hath betray'd me.
   I keep it not for thee, but for myself;
   A refuge from disgrace. Here is another:
   He who with high, but dangerous fortune grapples,
   Should he be foil'd, looks but to friends like these.

 Pulling out two daggers from his vest.
   This steel is strong to give a vig'rous thrust;
   The other on its venom'd point hath that
   Which, in the feeblest hand, gives death as certain,
   As though a giant smote the destin'd prey.

Cath.
   Thou desp'rate man! so arm'd against thyself!

Rud.
   Ay; and against myself with such resolves,
   Consider well how I shall deal with those
   Who may withstand my will or mar my purpose.
   Thinkst thou I'll feebly—

Cath.
                                            O be pacified.
   I will begone: I am a humbled wretch
   On whom thou tramplest with a tyrant's cruelty.


 Exit.
Rud.

 looks after her with a malignant laugh, and then goes to the door of an adjoining chamber, to the lock of which he applies his ear .
   All still within—I'm tired and heavy grown:
   I'll lay me down to rest. She is secure:
   No one can pass me here to gain her chamber.
   If she hold parley now with any thing,
   It must in truth be ghost or sprite.—Heigh ho!
   I'm tir'd, and will to bed.


 Lays himself on the couch and falls asleep.

 
The cry of hounds is then heard without at a distance, with the sound of a horn; and presently Orra enters, bursting from the door of the adjoining chamber, in great alarm.
Orra.
   Cathrina! sleepest thou? Awake! awake!

 Running up to the couch and starting back on seeing Rudigere .
                                            That hateful viper here!
   Is this my nightly guard? Detested wretch!
   I will steal back again.

 Walks softly on tiptoe to the door of her chamber, when the cry of hounds, &c. is again heard without, nearer than before.
                                            O no! I dare not.
   Though sleeping, and most hateful when awake,
   Still he is natural life and may be rous'd.

 Listening again.
   'Tis nearer now: that dismal thrilling blast!
   I must awake him.

 Approaching the couch and shrinking back again.
                                            O no! no, no!
   Upon his face he wears a horrid smile
   That speaks bad thoughts.

 Rud . speaks in his sleep.
                                            He mutters too my name.—
   I dare not do it.

 Listening again.
   The dreadful sound is now upon the wind,
   Sullen and low, as if it wound its way
   Into the cavern'd earth that swallow'd it.
   I will abide in patient silence here;
   Though hateful and asleep, I feel me still
   Near something of my kind.

 Crosses her arms, and leans in a cowering posture over the back of a chair at a distance from the couch; when presently the horn is heard without, louder than before, and she starts up.
   O it returns! as though the yawning earth
   Had given it up again, near to the walls.
   The horribly mingled din! 'tis nearer still:
   'Tis close at hand: 'tis at the very gate!

 Running up to the couch.
   Were he a murd'rer, clenching in his hands
   The bloody knife, I must awake him.—No!
   That face of dark and subtle wickedness!
   I dare not do it.
 Listening again. 
Ay; 'tis at the gate—
   Within the gate.—
                                            What rushing blast is that
   Shaking the doors? Some awful visitation
   Dread entrance makes! O mighty God of Heav'n!
   A sound ascends the stairs.
                                            Ho, Rudigere!
   Awake, awake! Ho! wake thee, Rudigere!

Rud.

 waking .
   What cry is that so terribly strong? — Ha! Orra!
   What is the matter?

Orra.
   It is within the walls. Didst thou not hear it?

Rud.
   What? The loud voice that called me?

Orra.
   No, it was mine.

Rud.
                                            It sounded in my ears
   With more than human strength.

Orra.
                                            Did it so sound?
   There is around us, in this midnight air,
   A power surpassing nature. List, I pray:
   Although more distant now, dost thou not hear
   The yell of hounds; the spectre-huntsman's horn?

Rud.
   I hear, indeed, a strangely mingled sound:
   The wind is howling round the battlements.
   But rest secure where safety is, sweet Orra!
   Within these arms, nor man nor fiend shall harm thee.


 Approaching her with a softened winning voice, while she pushes him off with abhorrence.
Orra.
   Vile reptile! touch me not.

Rud.
   Ah! Orra! thou art warp'd by prejudice,
   And taught to think me base; but in my veins
   Lives noble blood, which I will justify.

Orra.
   But in thy heart, false traitor! what lives there?

Rud.
   Alas! thy angel-faultlessness conceives not
   The strong temptations of a soul impassion'd
   Beyond control of reason.—At thy feet—

 Kneeling.
   O spurn me not!


Enter several Servants, alarmed.
Rud.
   What, all these fools upon us! Staring knaves,
   What brings ye here at this untimely hour?

 st serv.
   We have all heard it—'twas the yell of hounds
   And clatt'ring steeds, and the shrill horn between.

Rud.
   Out on such folly!

 d serv .
   In very truth it pass'd close to the walls;
   Did not your honour hear it?

Rud.
   Ha! sayst thou so? thou art not wont to join
   In idle tales.—I'll to the battlements
   And watch it there: it may return again.


 Exeunt severally , Rudigere followed by servants, and Orra into her own chamber.
SCENE IV.
The Outlaws' cave. Enter Theobald .
Theo.

 looking round .
   Here is a place in which some traces are
   Of late inhabitants. In yonder nook
   The embers faintly gleam, and on the walls
   Hang spears and ancient arms: I must be right
   A figure through the gloom moves towards me.
   Ho! there! Whoe'er you are: Holla! good friend!


Enter an Outlaw.
Out.
   A stranger! Who art thou, who art thus bold,
   To hail us here unbidden?



 
Theo.
   That thou shalt shortly know. Thou art, I guess,
   One of the outlaw'd band who haunt this forest.

Out.
   Be thy conjecture right or wrong, no more
   Shalt thou return to tell where thou hast found us.
   Now for thy life!


 Drawing his sword.
Theo.
                                            Hear me, I do entreat thee.

Out.
   Nay, nay! no foolish pleadings; for thy life
   Is forfeit now; have at thee!


 Falls fiercely upon Theobald , Who also draws and defends himself bravely, when another outlaw enters and falls likewise upon him. Theo . then recedes fighting, till he gets his back to the wall of the cavern, and there defends himself stoutly.

Enter Franko .
Franko.
   Desist, I charge you! Fighting with a stranger,
   Two swords to one—a solitary stranger!

 st out.
   We are discover'd; had he master'd me,
   He had return'd to tell his mates above
   What neighbours in these nether caves they have.
   Let us despatch him.

Franko.
                                            No, thou hateful butcher!
   Despatch a man alone and in our power!
   Who art thou, stranger, who dost use thy sword
   With no mean skill; and in this perilous case
   So bold an air and countenance maintainest?
   What brought thee hither?

Theo.
   My name is Theobald of Falkenstein;
   To find the valiant captain of these bands,
   And crave assistance of his gen'rous arm:
   This is my business here.

Franko

 struck and agitated, to his men .
   Go, join your comrades in the further cave.

 Exeunt outlaws.
   And thou art Falkenstein? In truth thou art.
   And who thinkst thou am I?

Theo.
   Franko, the gen'rous leader of those outlaws.

Franko.
   So am I call'd, and by that name alone
   They know me. Sporting on the mountain's side,
   Where Garva's wood waves green, in other days,
   Some fifteen years ago, they call'd me Albert.

Theo.

 rushing into his arms .
   Albert; my playmate Albert! Woe the day!
   What cruel fortune drove thee to this state?

Franko.
   I'll tell thee all! but tell thou first to me
   What is the aid thou camest here to ask.

Theo.
   Ay, thou wert ever thus: still forward bent
   To serve, not to be serv'd.
                                            But wave we this.
   Last night a lady to the castle came,
   In thraldom by a villain kept, whom I
   E'en with my life would rescue. Of armed force
   At present destitute, I come to thee
   Craving thy aid in counsel and in arms.

Franko.
   When didst thou learn that outlaws harbour here,
   For 'tis but lately we have held these haunts?

Theo.
   Not till within the precincts of the forest,
   Following the traces of that villain's course,
   One of your band I met, and recogniz'd
   As an old soldier, who, some few years back,
   Had under my command right bravely serv'd.
   Seeing himself discover'd, and encouraged
   By what I told him of my story, freely
   He offer'd to conduct me to his captain.
   But in a tangled path some space before me,
   Alarm'd at sight of spearmen through the brake,
   He started from his way, and so I miss'd him,
   Making my way alone to gain your cave.

Franko.
   Thou'rt welcome here: and gladly I'll assist thee,
   Though not by arms, the force within the castle
   So far out-numbering mine.
   But other means may serve thy purpose better.

Theo.
   What other means, I pray?

Franko.
   From these low caves, a passage under ground
   Leads to the castle—to the very tower
   Where, as I guess, the lady is confin'd.
   When sleep has still'd the house, we'll make our way.

Theo.
   Ay, by my faith it is a noble plan!
   Guarded or not, we well may overcome
   The few that may compose her midnight guard.

Franko.
   We shall not shrink from that.—But by my fay!
   To-morrow is St. Michael's eve: 'twere well
   To be the spectre-huntsman for a night,
   And bear her off, without pursuit or hindrance.

Theo.
   I comprehend thee not.

Franko.
                                            Thou shalt ere long.
   But stand not here; an inner room I have,
   Where thou shalt rest and some refreshment take,
   And then we will more fully talk of this,
   Which, slightly mention'd, seems chimerical.
   Follow me.

 Turning to him as they go out.
                                            Hast thou still upon thine arm
   That mark which from mine arrow thou receiv'dst
   When sportively we shot? The wound was deep,
   And gall'd thee much, but thou mad'st light of it.

Theo.
   Yes, here it is.


 Pulling up his sleeve as they go out, and Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
The ramparts of the castle. Enter Orra and Cathrina .
Cath.

 after a pause, in which Orra walks once or twice across the stage, thoughtfully .
   Go in, I pray; thou wand'rest here too long.

 A pause again.


 
   The air is cold; behind those further mountains
   The sun is set. I pray thee now go in.

Orra.
   Ha! sets the sun already? Is the day
   Indeed drawn to its close?

Cath.
                                            Yes, night approaches.
   See, many a gather'd flock of cawing rooks
   Are to their nests returning.

Orra

 solemnly .
                                            Night approaches!—
   This awful night which living beings shrink from;
   All now of every kind scour to their haunts,
   While darkness, peopled with its hosts unknown,
   Awful dominion holds. Mysterious night!
   What things unutterable thy dark hours
   May lap!—What from thy teeming darkness burst
   Of horrid visitations, ere that sun
   Again shall rise on the enlighten'd earth!


 A pause.
Cath.
   Why dost thou gaze intently on the sky?
   Seest thou aught wonderful?

Orra.
   Look there, behold that strange gigantic form
   Which yon grim cloud assumes; rearing aloft
   The semblance of a warrior's plumed head,
   While from its half-shaped arm a streamy dart
   Shoots angrily! Behind him too, far stretch'd,
   Seems there not, verily, a serried line
   Of fainter misty forms?

Cath.
                                            I see, indeed,
   A vasty cloud, of many clouds composed,
   Towering above the rest; and that behind
   In misty faintness seen, which hath some likeness
   To a long line of rocks with pine-wood crown'd:
   Or, if indeed the fancy so incline,
   A file of spearmen, seen through drifted smoke.

Orra.
   Nay, look how perfect now the form becomes:
   Dost thou not see?—Ay, and more perfect still.
   O thou gigantic lord, whose robed limbs
   Beneath their stride span half the heavens! art thou
   Of lifeless vapour formed? Art thou not rather
   Some air-clad spirit—some portentous thing—
   Some mission'd being—Such a sky as this
   Ne'er usher'd in a night of nature's rest.

Cath.
   Nay, many such I've seen; regard it not.
   That form, already changing, will ere long
   Dissolve to nothing. Tarry here no longer.
   Go in, I pray.

Orra.
                                            No; while one gleam remains
   Of the sun's blessed light, I will not go.

Cath.
   Then let me fetch a cloak to keep thee warm,
   For chilly blows the breeze.

Orra.
                                            Do as thou wilt.


 Exit Cath .

Enter an Outlaw, stealing softly behind her.
Out.

 in a low voice .
   Lady!—the Lady Orra!

Orra

 starting .
                                            Heaven protect me!
   Sounds it beneath my feet, in earth or air?

 He comes forward.
   Welcome is aught that wears a human face.
   Didst thou not hear a sound?

Out.
                                            What sound, an't please you?

Orra.
   A voice which call'd me now: it spoke, methought,
   In a low, hollow tone, suppress'd and low,
   Unlike a human voice.

Out.
                                            It was my own.

Orra.
   What wouldst thou have?

Out.
                                            Here is a letter, lady.

Orra.
   Who sent thee hither?

Out.
   It will tell thee all.

 Gives a letter.
   I must begone, your chieftain is at hand.


 Exit.
Orra.
   Comes it from Falkenstein? It is his seal.
   I may not read it here. I'll to my chamber.


 Exit hastily, not perceiving Rudigere , who enters by the opposite side, before she has time to go off.
Rud.
   A letter in her hand, and in such haste!
   Some secret agent here from Falkenstein?
   It must be so.


 Hastening after her, Exit.
SCENE II.
The Outlaws cave. Enter Theobald and Franko by opposite sides.
Theo.
   How now, good captain; draws it near the time?
   Are those the keys?

Franko.
                                            They are: this doth unlock
   The entrance to the staircase, known alone
   To Gomez, ancient keeper of the castle,
   Who is my friend in secret, and deters
   The neighb'ring peasantry with dreadful tales
   From visiting by night our wide domains.
   The other doth unlock a secret door,
   That leads us to the chamber where she sleeps.

Theo.
   Thanks, gen'rous friend! thou art my better genius.
   Didst thou not say, until the midnight horn
   Hath sounded thrice, we must remain conceal'd?

Franko.
   Even so. And now I hear my men without
   Telling the second watch.

Theo.
                                            How looks the night?

Franko.
   As we could wish: the stars do faintly twinkle
   Through sever'd clouds, and shed but light sufficient
   To show each nearer object closing on you
   In dim unshapely blackness. Aught that moves
   Across your path, or sheep or straggling goat,
   Is now a pawing steed or grizzly bull,
   Large and terrific; every air-mov'd bush
   Or jutting crag, some strange gigantic thing.

Theo.
   Is all still in the castle?

Franko.
   There is an owl sits hooting on the tower,


 
   That answer from a distant mate receives,
   Like the faint echo of his dismal cry;
   While a poor houseless dog by dreary fits
   Sits howling at the gate. All else is still.

Theo.
   Each petty circumstance is in our favour,
   That makes the night more dismal.

Franko.
   Ay, all goes well; as I approach'd the walls,
   I heard two sentinels—for now, I ween,
   The boldest spearman will not watch alone—
   Together talk in the deep hollow voice
   Of those who speak at midnight, under awe
   Of the dead stillness round them.

Theo.
   Then let us put ourselves in readiness,
   And heaven's good favour guide us!


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A gloomy apartment. Enter Orra and Rudigere .
Orra

 aside .
   The room is darken'd: yesternight a lamp
   Did shed its light around on roof and walls,
   And made the dreary space appear less dismal.

Rud.

 overhearing her, and calling to a servant without .
   Ho! more lights here!

 Servant enters with a light and exit.
   Thou art obey'd: in aught
   But in the company of human kind,
   Thou shalt be gratified. Thy lofty mind
   For higher superhuman fellowship,
   If such there be, may now prepare its strength.

Orra.
   Thou ruthless tyrant! They who have in battle
   Fought valiantly, shrink like a helpless child
   From any intercourse with things unearthly.
   Art thou a man? And bearst thou in thy breast
   The feelings of a man? It cannot be!

Rud.
   Yes, madam; in my breast I bear too keenly
   The feelings of a man—a man most wretched:
   A scorn'd, rejected man.—Make me less miserable;
   Nay rather should I say, make me most blest;
   And then—

Attempting to take her hand, while she steps back from him, drawing herself up with an air stately and determined, and looking steadfastly in his face.
   I too am firm. Thou knowst my fix'd resolve:
   Give me thy solemn promise to be mine.
   This is the price, thou haughty, scornful maid,
   That will redeem thee from the hour of terror!
   This is the price—

Orra.
                                            Which never shall be paid.


 Walks from him to the further end of the apartment.
Rud.

 after a pause .
   Thou art determin'd, then.
   Be not so rash:
   Bethink thee well what flesh and blood can bear:
   The hour is near at hand.

 She, turning round, waves him with her hand to leave her.
                                            Thou deignst no answer.
   Well; reap the fruits of thine unconquer'd pride.


 Exit.

Manet Orra .
Orra.
   I am alone: that closing door divides me
   From every being owning nature's life.—
   And shall I be constrain'd to hold communion
   With that which owns it not?

 After pacing to and fro for a little while.
   O that my mind
   Could raise its thoughts in strong and steady fervour
   To Him , the Lord of all existing things,
   Who lives, and is where'er existence is;
   Grasping its hold upon His skirted robe,
   Beneath whose mighty rule angels and spirits,
   Demons and nether powers, all living things,
   Hosts of the earth, with the departed dead
   In their dark state of mystery, alike
   Subjected are!—And I will strongly do it.—
   Ah! would I could! Some hidden powerful hindrance
   Doth hold me back, and mars all thought.—

 After a pause, in which she stands fixed with her arms crossed on her breast.
   Dread intercourse!
   O! if it look on me with its dead eyes!
   If it should move its lock'd and earthy lips,
   And utt'rance give to the grave's hollow sounds!
   If it stretch forth its cold and bony grasp—
   O horror, horror!

 Sinking lower at every successive idea, as she repeats these four last lines, till she is quite upon her knees on the ground.
   Would that beneath these planks of senseless matter
   I could, until the dreadful hour is past,
   As senseless be!

 Striking the floor with her hands.
   O open and receive me,
   Ye happy things of still and lifeless being,
   That to the awful steps which tread upon ye
   Unconscious are!

Enter Cathrina behind her.
   Who's there? Is't any thing?

Cath.
   'Tis I, my dearest lady; 'tis Cathrina.

Orra

 embracing her .
   How kind! such blessed kindness keep thee by me;
   I'll hold thee fast; an angel brought thee hither.
   I needs must weep to think thou art so kind
   In mine extremity.—Where wert thou hid?

Cath.
   In that small closet, since the supper hour,
   I've been conceal'd. For searching round the chamber,
   I found its door and enter'd. Fear not now,
   I will not leave thee till the break of day.



 
Orra.
   Heaven bless thee for it! Till the break of day!
   The very thought of daybreak gives me life.
   If but this night were past, I have good hope
   That noble Theobald will soon be here
   For my deliv'rance.

Cath.
                                            Wherefore thinkst thou so?

Orra.
   A stranger, when thou leftst me on the ramparts,
   Gave me a letter, which I quickly open'd,
   As soon as I, methought, had gain'd my room
   In privacy; but close behind me came
   That demon, Rudigere, and, snatching at it,
   Forced me to cast it to the flames, from which,
   I struggling with him still, he could not save it.

Cath.
   You have not read it then?

Orra.
                                            No; but the seal
   Was Theobald's, and I could swear ere long
   He will be here to free me from this thraldom.

Cath.
   God grant he may!

Orra.
   If but this night were past! How goes the time?
   Has it not enter'd on the midnight watch?

Cath.

 pointing to a small slab at the corner of the stage on which is placed a sand-glass .
   That Glass I've set to measure it. As soon
   As all the sand is run, you are secure;
   The midnight watch is past.

Orra

 running to the glass, and looking at it eagerly .
   There is not much to run; O an't were finish'd!
   But it so slowly runs!

Cath.
                                            Yes; watching it,
   It seemeth slow. But heed it not; the while,
   I'll tell thee some old tale, and ere I've finish'd,
   The midnight watch is gone. Sit down, I pray.

 They sit , Orra drawing her chair close to Cathrina .
   What story shall I tell thee?

Orra.
   Something, my friend, which thou thyself hast known,
   Touching the awful intercourse which spirits
   With mortal men have held at this dread hour.
   Didst thou thyself e'er meet with one whose eyes
   Had look'd upon the spectred dead—had seen
   Forms from another world?

Cath.
                                            Never but once.

Orra

 eagerly .
   Once then thou didst. O tell it! tell it me!

Cath.
   Well, since I needs must tell it, once I knew
   A melancholy man, who did aver,
   That journeying on a time o'er a wild waste,
   By a fell storm o'erta'en, he was compell'd
   To pass the night in a deserted tower,
   Where a poor hind, the sole inhabitant
   Of the sad place, prepared for him a bed:
   And, as he told his tale, at dead of night,
   By the pale lamp that in his chamber burn'd
   As it might be an arm's-length from his bed—

Orra.
   So close upon him?

Cath.
                                            Yes.

Orra.
                        Go on; what saw he?

Cath.
   An upright form, wound in a clotted shroud—
   Clotted and stiff, like one swath'd up in haste
   After a bloody death.

Orra.
                                            O horrible!

Cath.
   He started from his bed and gazed upon it.

Orra.
   And did he speak to it?

Cath.
                                            He could not speak.
   Its visage was uncover'd, and at first
   Seem'd fix'd and shrunk, like one in coffin'd sleep;
   But, as he gaz'd, there came, he wist not how,
   Into its beamless eyes a horrid glare,
   And turning towards him, for it did move—
   Why dost thou grasp me thus?

Orra.
   Go on, go on!

Cath.
   Nay, heaven forefend! Thy shrunk and sharpen'd features
   Are of the corse's colour, and thine eyes
   Are full of tears. How's this?

Orra.
                                            I know not how.
   A horrid sympathy jarr'd on my heart,
   And forced into mine eyes these icy tears.
   A fearful kindredship there is between
   The living and the dead—an awful bond!
   Woe's me! that we do shudder at ourselves—
   At that which we must be!—A dismal thought!
   Where dost thou run? thy story is not told.


 Seeing Cath . go towards the sand-glass.
Cath.

 showing the glass .
   A better story I will tell thee now;
   The midnight watch is past.

Orra.
   Ha! let me see.

Cath.
                                            There's not one sand to run.

Orra.
   But it is barely past.

Cath.
                                            'Tis more than past.
   For I did set it later than the hour,
   To be assur'dly sure.

Orra.
   Then it is gone indeed. O heaven be praised!
   The fearful gloom gone by!

 Holding up her hands in gratitude to heaven, and then looking round her with cheerful animation.
                                            In truth, already
   I feel as if I breath'd the morning air;
   I'm marvellously lighten'd.

Cath.
                                            Ne'ertheless,
   Thou art forespent; I'll run to my apartment,
   And fetch some cordial drops that will revive thee.

Orra.
   Thou needst not go; I've ta'en thy drops already;
   I'm bold and buoyant grown.


 Bounding lightly from the floor.
Cath.
                                            I'll soon return;
   Thou art not fearful now?



 
Orra.
                                            No; I breathe lightly;
   Valour within me grows most powerfully,
   Wouldst thou but stay to see it, gentle Cathrine!

Cath.
   I will return to see it, ere thou canst
   Three times repeat the letters of thy name.


 Exit hastily by the concealed door.
Orra.

 alone .
   This burst of courage shrinks most shamefully.
   I'll follow her.—

 Striving to open the door.
                                            'Tis fast; it will not open.
   I'll count my footsteps as I pace the floor
   Till she return again.
 Paces up and down, muttering to herself, when a horn is heard without, pausing and sounding three times, each time louder than before.

 Orra runs again to the door.

   Despair will give me strength; where is the door?
   Mine eyes are dark, I cannot find it now.
   O God! protect me in this awful pass!

 After a pause, in which she stands with her body bent in a cowering posture, with her hands locked together, and trembling violently, she starts up and looks wildly round her.
   There's nothing, yet I felt a chilly hand
   Upon my shoulder press'd. With open'd eyes
   And ears intent I'll stand. Better it is
   Thus to abide the awful visitation,
   Than cower in blinded horror, strain'd intensely
   With ev'ry beating of my goaded heart.

 Looking round her with a steady sternness, but shrinking again almost immediately.
   I cannot do it: on this spot I'll hold me
   In awful stillness.

 Bending her body as before; then, after a momentary pause, pressing both her hands upon her head.
   The icy scalp of fear is on my head;
   The life stirs in my hair; it is a sense
   That tells the nearing of unearthly steps,
   Albeit my ringing ears no sounds distinguish.


 Looking round, as if by irresistible impulse, to a great door at the bottom of the stage, which bursts open, and the form of a huntsman, clothed in black, with a horn in his hand, enters and advances towards her. She utters a loud shriek, and falls senseless on the ground.
Theo.

 running up to her, and raising her from the ground .
   No semblance, but real agony of fear.
   Orra, oh, Orra! knowst thou not my voice?
   Thy knight, thy champion, the devoted Theobald?
   Open thine eyes and look upon my face:

 Unmasking.
   I am no fearful waker from the grave.
   Dost thou not feel? 'Tis the warm touch of life.
   Look up, and fear will vanish.—Words are vain!
   What a pale countenance of ghastly strength
   By horror chang'd! O idiot that I was
   To hazard this—The villain hath deceiv'd me:
   My letter she has ne'er receiv'd. O fool!
   That I should trust to this!


 Beating his head distractedly.

Enter Franko , by the same door.
Franko.
   What is the matter? what strange turn is this?

Theo.
   O cursed sanguine fool! could I not think—
   She moves, she moves!—rouse thee, my gentle Orra!
   'Tis no strange voice that calls thee; 'tis thy friend.

Franko.
   She opens now her eyes.

Theo.
   But, oh, that look!

Franko.
   She knows thee not, but gives a stifled groan,
   And sinks again in stupor.
   Make no more fruitless lamentation here,
   But bear her hence: the cool and open air
   May soon restore her. Let us, while we may,
   Occasion seize, lest we should be surprised.


 Exeunt : Orra borne off in a state of insensibility.
ACT V. SCENE I.
The great hall of the castle. Enter Rudigere, Cathrina , and Attendants, by different doors.
Rud.

 to attend. 
   Return'd again! Is any thing discover'd?
   Or door or passage, garment dropt in haste,
   Or footstep's track, or any mark of flight?

 st att.
   No, by my faith! though we have search'd the castle
   From its high turret to its deepest vault.

Cath.
   'Tis vain to trace the marks of trackless feet.
   If that in truth it hath convey'd her hence,
   The yawning earth has yielded them a passage,
   Or else, through rifted roofs, the buoyant air.

Rud.
   Fools! search again. I'll raze the very walls
   From their foundations, but I will discover
   If door or pass there be to us unknown.
   Ho! Gomez, there!

 Calling off the stage.
                                            He keeps himself aloof:
   Nor aids the search with true and hearty will.
   I am betray'd—Ho! Gomez, there, I say!
   He shrinks away: go, drag the villain hither,
   And let the torture wring confession from him.

 A loud knocking heard at the gate.
   Ha! who seeks entrance at this early hour
   In such a desert place?

Cath.
                                            Some hind, perhaps,
   Who brings intelligence. Heaven grant it be!



 

Enter an armed Vassal.
Rud.
   Ha! one from Aldenberg! what brings thee hither?

Vass.

 seizing Rud .
   Thou art my prisoner.
 To attendants. 
Upon you peril,
   Assist me to secure him.

Rud.
   Audacious hind! by what authority
   Speakst thou such bold commands? Produce thy warrant.

Vass.
   'Tis at the gate, and such as thou must yield to:
   Count Hughobert himself, with armed men,
   A goodly band, his pleasure to enforce.


 Secures him.
Rud.
   What sudden freak is this? am I suspected
   Of aught but true and honourable faith?

Vass.
   Ay, by our holy saints! more than suspected.
   Thy creature Maurice, whom thou thought'st to bribe
   With things of seeming value, hath discover'd
   The cunning fraud; on which his tender conscience,
   Good soul! did o' the sudden so upbraid him,
   That to his lord forthwith he made confession
   Of all the plots against the Lady Orra,
   In which thy wicked arts had tempted him
   To take a wicked part. All is discover'd.

Cath.

 aside .
   All is discover'd! Where then shall I hide me?

 Aloud to vass. 
   What is discover'd?

Vass.
                                            Ha! most virtuous lady!
   Art thou alarm'd? Fear not: the world well knows
   How good thou art; and to the countess shortly,
   Who with her lord is near, thou wilt no doubt
   Give good account of all that thou hast done.

Cath.

 aside, as she retires in agitation .
   O heaven forbid! What hole o' th' earth will hide me!


 Exit.

Enter by the opposite side , Hughobert, Eleanora, Alice, Glottenbal, Urston, Maurice , and Attendants.
Hugh.

 speaking as he enters .
   Is he secured?

Vass.
                                            He is, my lord; behold!


 Pointing to Rud .
Hugh.

 to Rud .
   Black, artful traitor! Of a sacred trust,
   Blindly reposed in thee, the base betrayer
   For wicked ends; full well upon the ground
   Mayst thou decline those darkly frowning eyes,
   And gnaw thy lip in shame.

Rud.
   And rests no shame with him, whose easy faith
   Entrusts a man unproved; or, having proved him,
   Lets a poor hireling's unsupported testimony
   Shake the firm confidence of many years?

Hugh.
   Here the accuser stands; confront him boldly,
   And spare him not.


 Bringing forward Maurice .
Maur.

 to Rud .
   Deny it if thou canst. Thy brazen front,
   All brazen as it is, denies it not.

Rud.

 to Maur .
   Fool! that of prying curiosity
   And av'rice art compounded! I in truth
   Did give to thee a counterfeited treasure
   To bribe thee to a counterfeited trust;
   Meet recompense! Ha, ha! Maintain thy tale,
   For I deny it not.


 With careless derision.
Maur.
                                            O, subtle traitor!
   Dost thou so varnish it with seeming mirth?

Hugh.
   Sir Rudigere, thou dost, I must confess,
   Outface him well. But call the Lady Orra;
   If towards her thou hast thyself comported
   In honesty, she will declare it freely.

 To attendant. 
   Bring Orra hither.

 st att.
   Would that we could; last night i' the midnight watch
   She disappear'd; but whether man or devil
   Hath borne her hence, in truth we cannot tell.

Hugh.
   O both! Both man and devil together join'd.

 To Rud . furiously. 
   Fiend, villain, murderer! Produce her instantly.
   Dead or alive, produce thy hapless charge.

Rud.
   Restrain your rage, my lord; I would right gladly
   Obey you, were it possible: the place,
   And the mysterious means of her retreat,
   Are both to me unknown.

Hugh.
                                            Thou liest! thou liest!

Glot.

 coming forward .
   Thou liest, beast, villain, traitor! thinkst thou still
   To fool us thus? Thou shalt be forced to speak.

 To Hugh .
   Why lose we time in words when other means
   Will quickly work? Straight to those pillars bind him,
   And let each sturdy varlet of your train
   Inflict correction on him.

Maur.
   Ay, this alone will move him.

Hugh.
                                            Thou sayst well:
   By heaven it shall be done!

Rud.
   And will Count Hughobert degrade in me
   The blood of Aldenberg to shame himself?

Hugh.
   That plea avails thee not; thy spurious birth
   Gives us full warrant, as thy conduct varies,
   To reckon thee or noble or debased.

 To att. 
   Straight bind the traitor to the place of shame.


 As they are struggling to bind Rud . he gets one of his hands free, and, pulling out a dagger from under his clothes, stabs himself.
Rud.
   Now, take your will of me, and drag my corse


 
   Through mire and dust; your shameless fury now
   Can do me no disgrace.

Urston

 advancing .
   Rash, daring, thoughtless wretch! dost thou so close
   A wicked life in hardy desperation?

Rud.
   Priest, spare thy words: I add not to my sins
   That of presumption, in pretending now
   To offer up to heaven the forced repentance
   Of some short moments for a life of crimes.

Urst.
   My son, thou dost mistake me: let thy heart
   Confession make—

Glot.

 interrupting Urst. 
                                            Yes, dog! Confession make
   Of what thou'st done with Orra; else I'll spurn thee,
   And cast thy hateful carcass to the kites.

Hugh.

 pulling back Glot . as he is going to spurn Rud . with his foot, who is now fallen upon the ground .
   Nay, nay, forbear; such outrage is unmanly.


 Eleanora , who with Alice had retired from the shocking sight of Rudigere , new comes forward to him.
El.
   Oh, Rudigere! thou art a dying man,
   And we will speak to thee without upbraiding.
   Confess, I do entreat thee, ere thou goest
   To thy most awful change, and leave us not
   In this our horrible uncertainty.
   Is Orra here conceal'd?

Al.
                                            Thou hast not slain her?
   Confession make, and heaven have mercy on thee!

Rud.
   Yes, ladies; with these words of gentle meekness
   My heart is changed; and that you may perceive
   How greatly changed, let Glottenbal approach me;
   Spent am I now, and can but faintly speak—
   E'en unto him in token of forgiveness
   I'll tell what ye desire.

El.
                                            Thank heaven, thou art so changed!

Hugh.

 to Glot .
   Go to him, boy.


 Glottenbal goes to Rudigere , and stooping over him to hear what he has to say , Rudigere , taking a small dagger from his bosom, strikes Glottenbal on the neck.
Glot.
   Oh, he has wounded me!—Detested traitor!
   Take that and that; would thou hadst still a life
   For every thrust.


 Killing him.
Hugh.

 alarmed .
   Ha! has he wounded thee. my son?

Glot.
                                            A scratch;
   'Tis nothing more. He aim'd it at my throat,
   But had not strength to thrust.

Hugh.
                                            Thank God, he had not!

 A trumpet sounds without.
   Hark! martial notice of some high approach!

 To attendants. 
   Go to the gate.


 Exeunt attendants.
El.
   Who may it be? This castle is remote
   From every route which armed leaders take.


Enter a Servant.
Serv.
   The Banneret of Basle is at the gate.

Hugh.
   Is he in force?

Serv.
   Yes, through the trees his distant bands are seen
   Some hundreds strong, I guess; though with himself
   Two followers only come.


Enter Hartman attended.
Hugh.
   Forgive me, banneret, if I receive thee
   With more surprise than courtesy. How is it?
   Com'st thou in peace?

Hart.
   To you, my lord, I frankly will declare
   The purpose of my coming: having heard it,
   It is for you to say if I am come,
   As much I wish, in peace.

 To El .
   Countess, your presence much emboldens me
   To think it so shall be.

Hugh.

 impatiently .
                                            Proceed, I beg.
   When burghers gentle courtesy affect,
   It chafes me more than all their sturdy boasting.

Hart.
   Then with a burgher's plainness, Hughobert,
   I'll try my tale to tell,—nice task I fear!
   So that it may not gall a baron's pride.
   Brave Theobald, the lord of Falkenstein,
   Co-burgher also of our ancient city,
   Whose cause of course is ours, declares himself
   The suitor of thy ward, the Lady Orra;
   And learning that within these walls she is,
   By thine authority, in durance kept,
   In his behalf I come to set her free;
   As an oppressed dame, such service claiming
   From ev'ry gen'rous knight. What is thy answer?
   Say, am I come in peace? Wilt thou release her?

Hugh.
   Ah, would I could! In faith thou gall'st me shrewdly.

Hart.
   I've been inform'd of all that now disturbs you,
   By one who held me waiting at the gate.
   Until the maid be found, if 'tis your pleasure,
   Cease enmity.

Hugh.
   Then let it cease. A traitor has deceived me,
   And there he lies.


 Pointing to the body of Rud .
Hart.

 looking at the body .
   A ghastly smile of fell malignity
   On his distorted face death has arrested.

 Turning again to Hugh .
   And has he died, and no confession made?
   All means that may discover Orra's fate
   Shut from us?

Hugh.
   Ah! the fiend hath utter'd nothing
   That could betray his secret. If she lives—



 
El.
   Alas, alas! think you he murder'd her?

Al.
   Merciful heaven forefend!


Enter a Soldier in haste.
Sold.
   O, I have heard a voice, a dismal voice!

Omnes.
   What hast thou heard?

El.
                        What voice?

Sold.
                                            The Lady Orra's.

El.
   Where? Lead us to the place.

Hugh.
   Where didst thou heart it, soldier?

Sold.
   In a deep-tangled thicket of the wood,
   Close to a ruin'd wall, o'ergrown with ivy,
   That marks the ancient outworks of the castle.

Hugh.
   Haste; lead the way.


 Exeunt all eagerly, without order, following the soldier , Glottenbal and one attendant excepted.
Att.
   You do not go, my lord?

Glot.
   I'm sick, and strangely dizzy grows my head,
   And pains shoot from my wound. It is a scratch,
   But from a devil's fang.—There's mischief in it.
   Give me thine arm, and lead me to a couch:
   I'm very faint.

Att.
   This way, my lord; there is a chamber near.


 Exit Glottenbal , Supported by the attendant.
SCENE II.
The forest near the castle; in front a rocky bank crowned with a ruined wall overgrown with ivy, and the mouth of a cavern shaded with bushes. Enter Franko , conducting Hughobert, Hartman, Eleanora, Alice , and Urston , the Soldier following them.
Franko

 to Hugh ..
   This is the entry to our secret haunts.
   And now, my lord, having inform'd you truly
   Of the device, well meant, but most unhappy,
   By which the Lady Orra from her prison
   By Falkenstein was ta'en, myself, my outlaws,
   Unhappy men—who better days have seen,
   Driv'n to this lawless life by hard necessity,
   Are on your mercy cast.

Hugh.
   Which shall not fail you, valiant Franko. Much
   Am I indebted to thee: hadst thou not
   Of thine own free good will become our guide,
   As wand'ring here thou foundst us, we had ne'er
   The spot discover'd; for this honest soldier,
   A stranger to the forest, sought in vain
   To thread the tangled path.

El.

 to Franko .
   She is not well, thou sayst, and from her swoon
   Imperfectly recover'd.

Franko.
                                            When I left her,
   She so appear'd.—But enter not, I pray,
   Till I give notice.—Holla, you within!
   Come forth and fear no ill.


 A shriek heard from the cave.
Omnes.
   What dismal shriek is that?

Al.
                                            'Tis Orra's voice.

El.
   No, no! it cannot be! It is some wretch,
   In maniac's fetters bound.

Hart.
   The horrid thought that bursts into my mind!
   Forbid it, righteous Heaven!


 Running into the cave, he is prevented by Theobald , who rushes out upon him.
Theo.
   Hold, hold! no entry here but o'er my corse,
   When ye have master'd me.

Hart.
                                            My Theobald,
   Dost thou not know thy friends?

Theo.
   Ha! thou, my Hartman! Art thou come to me?

Hart.
   Yes, I am come. What means that look of anguish?
   She is not dead!

Theo.
                                            Oh, no! it is not death!

Hart.
   What meanst thou? Is she well?

Theo.
                                            Her body is.

Hart.
   And not her mind?—Oh! direst wreck of all!
   That noble mind!—But 'tis some passing seizure,
   Some powerful movement of a transient nature;
   It is not madness?

Theo.

 shrinking from him, and bursting into tears .
   'Tis heaven's infliction; let us call it so;
   Give it no other name.


 Covering his face.
El.

 to Theo .
   Nay, do not thus despair: when she beholds us,
   She'll know her friends, and, by our kindly soothing,
   Be gradually restored.

Al.
   Let me go to her.

Theo.
                                            Nay, forbear, I pray thee;
   I will myself with thee, my worthy Hartman,
   Go in and lead her forth.


 Theobald and Hartman go into the cavern, while those without wait in deep silence, which is only broken once or twice by a scream from the cavern and the sound of Theobald ' s voice speaking soothingly, till they return, leading forth Orra , with her hair and dress disordered, and the appearance of wild distraction in her gait and countenance.
Orra

 shrinking back as she comes from under the shade of the trees, &c. and dragging Theobald and Hartman back with her .
   Come back, come back! The fierce and fiery light!

Theo.
   Shrink not, dear love! it is the light of day.

Orra.
   Have cocks crow'd yet?

Theo.
                                            Yes; twice I've heard already
   Their matin sound. Look up to the blue sky;


 
   Is it not daylight there? And these green boughs
   Are fresh and fragrant round thee: every sense
   Tells thee it is the cheerful early day.

Orra.
   Ay, so it is; day takes his daily turn,
   Rising between the gulfy dells of night
   Like whiten'd billows on a gloomy sea;
   Till glow-worms gleam, and stars peep through the dark,
   And will-o'-the-wisp his dancing taper light,
   They will not come again.

 Bending her ear to the ground.
   Hark, hark! Ay, hark!
   They are all there: I hear their hollow sound
   Full many a fathom down.

Theo.
   Be still, poor troubled soul! they'll ne'er return:
   They are for ever gone. Be well assured
   Thou shalt from henceforth have a cheerful home
   With crackling faggots on thy midnight fire,
   Blazing like day around thee; and thy friends—
   Thy living, loving friends still by thy side,
   To speak to thee and cheer thee.—See, my Orra!
   They are beside thee now; dost thou not know them?


 Pointing to Eleanora and Alice. 
Orra

 gazing at them with her hand held up to shade her eyes .
   No, no! athwart the wav'ring garish light,
   Things move and seem to be, and yet are nothing.

El.

 going near her .
   My gentle Orra! hast thou then forgot me?
   Dost thou not know my voice?

Orra.
   'Tis like an old tune to my ear return'd.
   For there be those, who sit in cheerful halls,
   And breathe sweet air, and speak with pleasant sounds;
   And once I liv'd with such; some years gone by;
   I wot not now how long.

Hugh.
   Keen words that rend my heart!—Thou hadst a home,
   And one whose faith was pledged for thy protection.

Urst.
   Be more composed, my lord, some faint remembrance
   Returns upon her with the well-known sound
   Of voices once familiar to her ear.
   Let Alice sing to her some fav'rite tune,
   That may lost thoughts recall.


 Alice sings an old tune, and Orra , who listens eagerly and gazes on her while she sings, afterwards bursts into a wild laugh.
Orra.
   Ha, ha! the witched air sings for thee bravely.
   Hoot owls through mantling fog for matin birds?
   It lures not me. — I know thee well enough:
   The bones of murder'd men thy measure beat,
   And fleshless heads nod to thee.—Off, I say!
   Why are ye here?—That is the blessed sun.

El.
   Ah, Orra! do not look upon us thus!
   These are the voices of thy loving friends
   That speak to thee: this is a friendly hand
   That presses thine so kindly.


 Putting her hand upon Orra ' s, who gives a loud shriek, and shrinks from her with horror.
Hart.
   O grievous state.
 Going up to her. 
What terror seizes thee?

Orra.
   Take it away! It was the swathed dead!
   I know its clammy, chill, and bony touch.

 Fixing her eyes fiercely on Eleanora .
   Come not again; I'm strong and terrible now:
   Mine eyes have look'd upon all dreadful things;
   And when the earth yawns, and the hell-blast sounds,
   I'll 'bide the trooping of unearthly steps
   With stiff-clench'd, terrible strength.


 Holding her clenched hands over her head with an air of grandeur and defiance.
Hugh.

 beating his breast .
   A murd'rer is a guiltless wretch to me.

Hart.
   Be patient; 'tis a momentary pitch;
   Let me encounter it.


 Goes up to Orra , and fixes his eyes upon her, which she, after a moment, shrinks from and seeks to avoid, yet still, as if involuntarily, looks at him again.
Orra.
   Take off from me thy strangely-fasten'd eye:
   I may not look upon thee, yet I must.

 Still turning from him, and still snatching a hasty look at him as before.
   Unfix thy baleful glance: art thou a snake?
   Something of horrid power within thee dwells.
   Still, still that powerful eye doth such me in
   Like a dark eddy to its wheeling core.
   Spare me! O spare me, being of strange power,
   And at thy feet my subject head I'll lay!


 Kneeling to Hartman and bending her head submissively.
El.
   Alas the piteous sight! to see her thus;
   The noble generous, playful, stately Orra!

Theo.

 running to Hartman , and pushing him away with indignation .
   Out on thy hateful and ungenerous guile!
   Thinkst thou I'll suffer o'er her wretched state
   The slightest shadow of a base control?

 Raising Orra from the ground.
   No, rise thou stately flower with rude blasts rent:
   As honour'd art thou with thy broken stem,
   And leaflets strew'd, as in thy summer's pride.
   I've seen thee worshipp'd like a regal dame
   With every studied form of mark'd devotion,
   Whilst I in distant silence, scarcely proffer'd
   E'en a plain soldier's courtesy; but now,
   No liege-man to his crowned mistress sworn,
   Bound and devoted is, as I to thee;
   And he who offers to thy alter'd state
   The slightest seeming of diminish'd revirence,
   Must in my blood—
 To Hartman .
O pardon me, my friend!
   Thou'st wrung my heart.

Hart.
   Nay, do thou pardon me: I am to blame:
   Thy nobler heart shall not again be wrung.


 
   But what can now be done? O'er such wild ravings
   There must be some control.

Theo.
   O none! none, none! but gentle sympathy
   And watchfulness of love.
                                            My noble Orra!
   Wander where'er thou wilt; thy vagrant steps
   Shall follow'd be by one, who shall not weary,
   Nor e'er detach him from his hopeless task;
   Bound to thee now as fairest, gentlest beauty
   Could ne'er have bound him.

Al.
   See how she gazes on him with a look,
   Subsiding gradually to softer sadness.
   Half saying that she knows him.

El.
   There is a kindness in her changing eye.
   Yes, Orra, 'tis the valiant Theobald,
   Thy knight and champion, whom thou gazest on.

Orra.
   The brave are like the brave; so should it be.
   He was a goodly man—a noble knight.

 To Theobald .
   What is thy name, young soldier?—Woe is me!
   For prayers of grace are said o'er dying men,
   Yet they have laid thy clay in unblest earth—
   Shame! shame! not with the still'd and holy dead.
   This shall be rectified; I'll find it out;
   And masses shall be said for thy repose;
   Thou shalt not troop with these.

El.
   'Tis not the dead, 'tis Theobald himself,
   Alive and well, who standeth by thy side.

Orra

 looking wildly round .
   Where, where? All dreadful things are near me. round me,
   Beneath my feet and in the loaded air.
   Let him begone! The place is horrible!
   Baneful to flesh and blood.—The dreadful blast!
   Their hounds now yell below i' the centre gulph;
   They may not rise again till solemn bells
   Have giv'n the stroke that severs night from morn.

El.
   O rave not thus! Dost thou not know us, Orra?

Orra

 hastily .
   Ay, well enough I know ye.

Urst.
   Ha! think ye that she does?

El.
   It is a terrible smile of recognition,
   If such it be.

Hart.
   Nay, do not thus your restless eye-balls move,
   But look upon us steadily, sweet Orra.

Orra.
   Away! your faces waver to and fro;
   I'll know you better in your winding-sheets,
   When the moon shines upon you.

Theo.
   Give o'er, my friends; you see it is in vain;
   Her mind within itself holds a dark world
   Of dismal phantasies and horrid forms!
   Contend with her no more.


Enter an attendant in an abrupt disturbed manner.
Att.

 to Eleanora , aside .
   Lady, I bring to you most dismal news:
   Too grievous for my lord, so suddenly
   And unprepar'd to hear.

El.

 aside .
                                            What is it? Speak.

Att.

 aside to El 
   His son is dead, all swell'd and rack'd withpain;
   And on the dagger's point, which the sly traitor
   Still in his stiffen'd grasp retains, foul stains,
   Like those of limed poison, show full well
   The wicked cause of his untimely death.

Hugh.

 overhearing them .
   Who speaks of death? What didst thou whisper there?
   How is my son?—What look is that thou wearst?
   He is not dead?—Thou dost not speak! O God!
   I have no son.

 After a pause.
                                            I am bereft!—But this!
   But only him!—Heaven's vengeance deals the stroke.

Urst.
   Heaven oft in mercy smites, e'en when the blow
   Is most severe.

Hugh.
                                            I had no other hope.
   Fell is the stroke, if mercy in it be!
   Could this—could this alone atone my crime?

Urst.
   Submit thy soul to Heaven's all-wise decree.
   Perhaps his life had blasted more thy hopes
   Than e'en his grievous end.

Hugh.
   He was not all a father's heart could wish;
   But, oh! he was my son!—my only son:
   My child—the thing that from his cradle grew,
   And was before me still.—Oh, oh! Oh, oh!


 Beating his breast and groaning deeply.
Orra

 running up to him .
   Ha! dost thou groan, old man? art thou in trouble?
   Out on it! though they lay him in the mould,
   He's near thee still.—I'll tell thee how it is:
   A hideous burst hath been: the damn'd and holy,
   The living and the dead, together are
   In horrid neighbourship—'Tis but thin vapour,
   Floating around thee, makes the wav'ring bound.
   Pooh! blow it off, and see th' uncurtain'd reach.
   See! from all points they come; earth casts them up!
   In grave-clothes swath'd are those but new in death;
   And there be some half bone, half cased in shreds
   Of that which flesh hath been; and there be some
   With wicker'd ribs, through which the darkness scowls.
   Back, back!—They close upon us.—Oh! the void
   Of hollow unball'd sockets staring grimly,
   And lipless jaws that move and clatter round us
   In mockery of speech!—Back, back, I say!
   Back, back!


 Catching hold of Hughobert and Theobald , and dragging them back with her in all the wild strength of frantic horror, whilst the curtain drops.


DE MONFORT: A TRAGEDY.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN De Monfort .

Rezenvelt .

Count Freberg , friend to De Monfort and Rezenvelt .

Manuel , servant to De Monfort .

Jerome, De Monfort's old landlord .

Conrad , an artful knave .

Bernard , a monk .

Monks, gentlemen, officers, page, &c. &c.

WOMEN Jane De Monfort , sister to De Monfort .

Countess Freberg , wife to Freberg .

Theresa , servant to the Countess .

Abbess, nuns, and a lay sister, ladies, &c.



Scene, a town in Germany.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Jerome's house. A large old-fashioned chamber .
Jer.

 speaking without .
   This way, good masters.

Enter Jerome , bearing a light, and followed by Manuel , and servants carrying luggage .
                                            Rest your burthens here.
   This spacious room will please the marquis best.
   He takes me unawares; but ill prepar'd:
   If he had sent, e'en though a hasty notice,
   I had been glad.

Man.
                                            Be not disturb'd, good Jerome;
   Thy house is in most admirable order;
   And they who travel o' cold winter nights
   Think homeliest quarters good.

Jer.
   He is not far behind?

Man.
                                            A little way.

 To the servants .
   Go you and wait below till he arrive.

Jer.

 shaking Manuel by the hand .
   Indeed, my friend, I'm glad to see you here;
   Yet marvel wherefore.

Man.
   I marvel wherefore too, my honest Jerome:
   But here we are; pri'thee be kind to us.

Jer.
   Most heartily I will. I love your master:
   He is a quiet and a lib'ral man:
   A better inmate never cross'd my door.

Man.
   Ah! but he is not now the man he was.
   Lib'ral he'll be. God grant he may be quiet.

Jer.
   What has befallen him?

Man.
                                            I cannot tell thee;
   But, faith, there is no living with him now.

Jer.
   And yet, methinks, if I remember well
   You were about to quit his service, Manuel,
   When last he left this house. You grumbled then.

Man.
   I've been upon the eve of leaving him
   These ten long years; for many times he is
   So difficult, capricious, and distrustful,
   He galls my nature—yet, I know not how,
   A secret kindness binds me to him still.

Jer.
   Some who offend from a suspicious nature,
   Will afterwards such fair confession make
   As turns e'en the offence into a favour.

Man.
   Yes, some indeed do so; so will not he:
   He'd rather die than such confession make.



 
Jer.
   Ay, thou art right; for now I call to mind
   That once he wrong'd me with unjust suspicion,
   When first he came to lodge beneath my roof;
   And when it so fell out that I was prov'd
   Most guiltless of the fault, I truly thought
   He would have made profession of regret.
   But silent, haughty, and ungraciously
   He bore himself as one offended still.
   Yet shortly after, when unwittingly
   I did him some slight service, o' the sudden
   He overpower'd me with his grateful thanks;
   And would not be restrain'd from pressing on me
   A noble recompense. I understood
   His o'erstrain'd gratitude and bounty well,
   And took it as he meant.

Man.
                                            'Tis often thus.
   I would have left him many years ago,
   But that with all his faults there sometimes come
   Such bursts of natural goodness from his heart,
   As might engage a harder churl than I
   To serve him still.—And then his sister too;
   A noble dame, who should have been a queen:
   The meanest of her hinds, at her command,
   Had fought like lions for her, and the poor,
   E'en o'er their bread of poverty, had bless'd her—
   She would have griev'd if I had left my lord.

Jer.
   Comes she along with him?

Man.
   No, he departed all unknown to her,
   Meaning to keep conceal'd his secret route;
   But well I knew it would afflict her much,
   And therefore left a little nameless billet,
   Which after our departure, as I guess,
   Would fall into her hands, and tell her all.
   What could I do! O 'tis a noble lady!

Jer.
   All this is strange—something disturbs his mind—
   Belike he is in love.

Man.
                                            No, Jerome, no.
   Once on a time I serv'd a noble master,
   Whose youth was blasted with untoward love,
   And he, with hope and fear and jealousy
   For ever toss'd, led an unquiet life:
   Yet, when unruffled by the passing fit,
   His pale wan face such gentle sadness wore
   As mov'd a kindly heart to pity him.
   But Monfort, even in his clamest hour,
   Still bears that gloomy sternness in his eye
   Which powerfully repels all sympathy.
   O no! good Jerome, no, it is not love.

Jer.
   Hear I not horses trampling at the gate?

 Listening .
   He is arrived — stay thou — I had forgot —
   A plague upon't! my head is so confus'd—
   I will return i' the instant to receive him.


 Exit hastily .

 A great bustle without. Exit Manuel with lights, and returns again, lighting in De Monfort , as if just alighted from his journey .
Man.
   Your ancient host, my lord, receives you gladly,
   And your apartment will be soon prepar'd.

De Mon.
   'Tis well.

Man.
   Where shall I place the chest you gave in charge?
   So please you, say, my lord.

De Mon.

 throwing himself into a chair .
                                            Wheree'er thou wilt.

Man.
   I would not move that luggage till you came.


 Pointing to certain things .
De Mon.
   Move what thou wilt, and trouble me no more.


 Manuel , with the assistance of other servants , sets about putting the things in order, and De Monfort remains sitting in a thoughtful posture .

Enter Jerome , bearing wine, &c. on a salver. As he approaches De Monfort, Manuel pulls him by the sleeve .
Man.

 aside to Jerome .
   No, do not now; he will not be disturb'd.

Jer.
   What! not to bid him welcome to my house,
   And offer some refreshment?

Man.
                                            No, good Jerome.
   Softly a little while: I pri'thee do.


 Jerome walks softly on tiptoe, till he gets behind De Monfort , then peeping on one side to see his face .
Jer.

 aside to Manuel .
   Ah, Manuel, what an alter'd man is here!
   His eyes are hollow, and his cheeks are pale—
   He left this house a comely gentleman.

De Mon.
   Who whispers there?

Man.
                                            'Tis your old landlord, sir.

Jer.
   I joy to see you here—I crave your pardon—
   I fear I do intrude—

De Mon.
   No, my kind host, I am obliged to thee.

Jer.
   How fares it with your honour?

De Mon.
                                            Well enough.

Jer.
   Here is a little of the fav'rite wine
   That you were wont to praise. Pray honour me.


 Fills a glass .
De Mon.

 after drinking .
   I thank you, Jerome, 'tis delicious.

Jer.
   Ay, my dear wife did ever make it so.

De Mon.
   And how does she?

Jer.
                                            Alas, my lord! she's dead.

De Mon.
   Well, then she is at rest.

Jer.
                                            How well, my lord?

De Mon.
   Is she not with the dead, the quiet dead,
   Where all is peace? Not e'en the impious wretch,
   Who tears the coffin from its earthy vault,
   And strews the mould'ring ashes to the wind,
   Can break their rest.

Jer.
   Woe's me! I thought you would have griev'd for her.
   She was a kindly soul! Before she died,
   When pining sickness bent her cheerless head,


 
   She set my house in order—
   And but the morning ere she breath'd her last,
   Bade me preserve some flaskets of this wine,
   That should the Lord de Monfort come again
   His cup might sparkle still.

 De Monfort walks across the stage, and wipes his eyes .
   Indeed I fear I have distress'd you, sir;
   I surely thought you would be griev'd for her.

De Mon.

 taking Jerome's hand .
   I am, my friend. How long has she been dead?

Jer.
   Two sad long years.

De Mon.
                                            Would she were living still!
   I was too troublesome, too heedless of her.

Jer.
   O no! she lov'd to serve you.


 Loud knocking without .
De Mon.
   What fool comes here, at such untimely hours,
   To make this cursed noise?
 To Manuel .
Go to the gate.

 Exit Manuel .
   All sober citizens are gone to bed;
   It is some drunkards on their nightly rounds,
   Who mean it but in sport.

Jer.
   I hear unusual voices—here they come.


Re-enter Manuel , showing in Count Freberg and his lady, with a mask in her hand .
Freb.

 running to embrace De Mon .
   My dearest Monfort! most unlook'd for pleasure!
   Do I indeed embrace thee here again?
   I saw thy servant standing by the gate,
   His face recall'd, and learnt the joyful tidings!
   Welcome, thrice welcome here!

De Mon.
   I thank thee, Freberg, for this friendly visit,
   And this fair lady too.


 Bowing to the lady .
Lady.
                                            I fear, my lord,
   We do intrude at an untimely hour:
   But now, returning from a midnight mask,
   My husband did insist that we should enter.

Freb.
   No, say not so; no hour untimely call,
   Which doth together bring long absent friends.
   Dear Monfort, why hast thou so slily play'd,
   Coming upon us thus so suddenly?

De Mon.
   O! many varied thoughts do cross our brain,
   Which touch the will, but leave the memory trackless;
   And yet a strange compounded motive make,
   Wherefore a man should bend his evening walk
   To th' east or west, the forest or the field.
   Is it not often so?

Freb.
   I ask no more, happy to see you here
   From any motive. There is one behind,
   Whose presence would have been a double bliss:
   Ah! how is she? The noble Jane De Monfort.

De Mon.

 confused .
   She is—I have—I left my sister well.

Lady.

 to Freberg .
   My Freberg, you are heedless of respect.
   You surely mean to say the Lady Jane.

Freb.
   Respect! No, madam; Princess, Empress, Queen,
   Could not denote a creature so exalted
   As this plain appellation doth,
   The noble Jane De Monfort.

Lady.

 turning from him displeased to Mon .
   You are fatigued, my lord; you want repose;
   Say, should we not retire?

Freb.
                                            Ha! is it so?
   My friend, your face is pale; have you been ill?

De Mon.
   No, Freberg, no; I think I have been well.

Freb.

 shaking his head .
   I fear thou hast not, Monfort—Let it pass.
   We'll re-establish thee: we'll banish pain.
   I will collect some rare, some cheerful friends,
   And we shall spend together glorious hours,
   That gods might envy. Little time so spent
   Doth far outvalue all our life beside.
   This is indeed our life, our waking life,
   The rest dull breathing sleep.

De Mon.
   Thus, it is true, from the sad years of life
   We sometimes do short hours, yea minutes strike,
   Keen, blissful, bright, never to be forgotten;
   Which, through the dreary gloom of time o'erpast,
   Shine like fair sunny spots on a wild waste.
   But few they are, as few the heaven-fir'd souls
   Whose magic power creates them. Bless'd art thou,
   If, in the ample circle of thy friends,
   Thou canst but boast a few.

Freb.
   Judge for thyself: in truth I do not boast.
   There is amongst my friends, my later friends,
   A most accomplish'd stranger: new to Amberg;
   But just arriv'd, and will ere long depart:
   I met him in Franconia two years since.
   He is so full of pleasant anecdote,
   So rich, so gay, so poignant is his wit,
   Time vanishes before him as he speaks,
   And ruddy morning through the lattice peeps
   Ere night seems well begun.

De Mon.
                                            How is he call'd?

Freb.
   I will surprise thee with a welcome face:
   I will not tell thee now.

Lady.

 to Mon .
   I have, my lord, a small request to make,
   And must not be denied. I too may boast
   Of some good friends, and beauteous country-women:
   To-morrow night I open wide my doors
   To all the fair and gay: beneath my roof
   Music, and dance, and revelry shall reign:
   I pray you come and grace it with your presence.

De Mon.
   You honour me too much to be denied.

Lady.
   I thank you, sir; and in return for this,
   We shall withdraw, and leave you to repose.



 
Freb.
   Must it be so? Good night—sweet sleep to thee!


 to DeMonfort .
De Mon.

 to Freb .
   Good night.

 To lady .
   Good night, fair lady.

Lady.
                                            Farewell!


 Exeunt Freberg and lady .
De Mon.

 to Jer .
   I thought Count Freberg had been now in France.

Jer.
   He meant to go, as I have been inform'd.

De Mon.
   Well, well, prepare my bed; I will to rest.


 Exit Jerome .
De Mon.

 aside .
   I know not how it is, my heart stands back,
   And meets not this man's love.—Friends! rarest friends!
   Rather than share his undiscerning praise
   With every table-wit, and book-form'd sage,
   And paltry poet puling to the moon,
   I'd court from him proscription, yea abuse,
   And think it proud distinction.


 Exit .
SCENE II.
A small apartment in Jerome's house: a table and breakfast set out. Enter De Monfort , followed by Manuel , and sits down by the table, with a cheerful face .
De Mon.
   Manuel, this morning's sun shines pleasantly:
   These old apartments too are light and cheerful.
   Our landlord's kindness has reviv'd me much:
   He serves as though he lov'd me. This pure air
   Braces the listless nerves, and warms the blood:
   I feel in freedom here.


 Filling a cup of coffee, and drinking .
Man.
                                            Ah! sure, my lord,
   No air is purer than the air at home.

De Mon.
   Here can I wander with assured steps,
   Nor dread, at every winding of the path,
   Lest an abhorred serpent cross my way,
   To move—


 stopping short .
Man.
                                            What says your honour?
   There are no serpents in our pleasant fields.

De Mon.
   Thinkst thou there are no serpents in the world,
   But those who slide along the grassy sod,
   And sting the luckless foot that presses them?
   There are who in the path of social life
   Do bask their spotted skins in Fortune's sun,
   And sting the soul—Ay, till its healthful frame
   Is chang'd to secret, fest'ring, sore disease,
   So deadly is the wound.

Man.
   Heav'n guard your honour from such horrid scath!
   They are but rare, I hope!

De Mon.

 shaking his head .
   We mark the hollow eye, the wasted frame,
   The gait disturb'd of wealthy honour'd men,
   But do not know the cause.

Man.
   'Tis very true. God keep you well, my lord!

De Mon.
   I thank thee, Manuel, I am very well.
   I shall be gay too, by the setting sun.
   I go to revel it with sprightly dames,
   And drive the night away.


 Filling another cup, and drinking .
Man.
   I should be glad to see your honour gay.

De Mon.
   And thou too shalt be gay. There, honest Manuel,
   Put these broad pieces in thy leathern purse,
   And take at night a cheerful jovial glass.
   Here is one too, for Bremer; he loves wine:
   And one for Jaques: be joyful altogether.


Enter Servant.
Ser.
   My lord, I met e'en now, a short way off,
   Your countryman the Marquis Rezenvelt.

De Mon.

 starting from his seat, and letting the cup fall from his hand .
   Whom sayst thou?

Ser.
                                            Marquis Rezenvelt, an' please you.

De Mon.
   Thou liest—it is not so—it is impossible!

Ser.
   I saw him with these eyes, plain as yourself.

De Mon.
   Fool! 'tis some passing stranger thou hast seen,
   And with a hideous likeness been deceiv'd.

Ser.
   No other stranger could deceive my sight.

De Mon.

 dashing his clenched hand violently upon the table, and overturning every thing .
   Heaven blast thy sight! it lights on nothing good.

Ser.
   I surely thought no harm to look upon him.

De Mon.
   What, dost thou still insist? He must it be?
   Does it so please thee well?
 Servant endeavours to speak .
Hold thy damn'd tongue!
   By heaven I'll kill thee!


 Going furiously up to him .
Man.

 in a soothing voice .
   Nay, harm him not, my lord; he speaks the truth;
   I've met his groom, who told me certainly
   His lord is here. I should have told you so,
   But thought, perhaps, it might displease your honour.

De Mon.

 becoming all at once calm, and turning sternly to Manuel .
   And how dar'st thou
   To think it would displease me?
   What is't to me who leaves or enters Amberg?
   But it displeases me, yea e'en to frenzy,
   That every idle fool must hither come,
   To break my leisure with the paltry tidings
   Of all the cursed things he stares upon.

 Servant attempts to speak — De Monfort stamps with his foot .
   Take thine ill-favour'd visage from my sight,
   And speak of it no more.

 Exit Servant .
   And go thou too; I choose to be alone.
 Exit Manuel .

 De Monfort goes to the door by which they went out; opens it, and looks .



 
   But is he gone indeed? Yes, he is gone.

 Goes to the opposite door, opens it, and looks: then gives loose to all the fury of gesture, and walks up and down in great agitation .
   It is too much: by heaven it is too much!
   He haunts me—stings me—like a devil haunts—
   He'll make a raving maniac of me—Villain!
   The air wherein thou drawst thy fulsome breath
   Is poison to me—Oceans shall divide us!

 Pauses .
   But no; thou thinkst I fear thee, cursed reptile;
   And hast a pleasure in the damned thought.
   Though my heart's blood should curdle at thy sight,
   I'll stay and face thee still.

 Knocking at the chamber door .
                                            Ha! who knocks there?

Freberg.

 without .
   It is thy friend, De Monfort.

De Mon.

 opening the door .
                                            Enter, then.


Enter Freberg .
Freb.

 taking his hand kindly .
   How art thou now? How hast thou pass'd the night?
   Has kindly sleep refresh'd thee?

De Mon.
   Yes, I have lost an hour or two in sleep,
   And so should be refresh'd.

Freb.
                                            And art thou not?
   Thy looks speak not of rest. Thou art disturb'd.

De Mon.
   No, somewhat ruffled from a foolish cause,
   Which soon will pass away.

Freb.

 shaking his head .
   Ah no, De Monfort! something in thy face
   Tells me another tale. Then wrong me not:
   If any secret grief distract thy soul,
   Here am I all devoted to thy love:
   Open thy heart to me. What troubles thee?

De Mon.
   I have no grief: distress me not, my friend.

Freb.
   Nay, do not call me so. Wert thou my friend,
   Wouldst thou not open all thine inmost soul,
   And bid me share its every consciousness?

De Mon.
   Freberg, thou knowst not man; not nature's man,
   But only him who, in smooth studied works
   Of polish'd sages, shines deceitfully
   In all the splendid foppery of virtue.
   That man was never born whose secret soul,
   With all its motley treasure of dark thoughts,
   Foul fantasies, vain musings, and wild dreams,
   Was ever open'd to another's scan.
   Away, away! it is delusion all.

Freb.
   Well, be reserved then; perhaps I'm wrong.

De Mon.
   How goes the hour?

Freb.
   'Tis early still; a long day lies before us;
   Let us enjoy it. Come along with me;
   I'll introduce you to my pleasant friend.

De Mon.
   Your pleasant friend?

Freb.
                                            Yes, him of whom I spake.

 Taking his hand .
   There is no good I would not share with thee;
   And this man's company, to minds like thine,
   Is the best banquet feast I could bestow.
   But I will speak in mystery no more;
   It is thy townsman, noble Rezenvelt.

 De Mon . pulls his hand hastily from Freberg , and shrinks back .
                                            Ha! what is this?
   Art thou pain-stricken, Monfort?
   Nay, on my life, thou rather seemst offended:
   Does it displease thee that I call him friend?

De Mon.
   No, all men are thy friends.

Freb.
   No, say not all men. But thou art offended.
   I see it well. I thought to do thee pleasure.
   But if his presence be not welcome here,
   He shall not join our company to-day.

De Mon.
   What dost thou mean to say? What is't to me
   Whether I meet with such a thing as Rezenvelt
   To-day, to-morrow, every day, or never?

Freb.
   In truth, I thought you had been well with him;
   He prais'd you much.

De Mon.
   I thank him for his praise—Come, let us move:
   This chamber is confin'd and airless grown.

 Starting .
   I hear a stranger's voice!

Freb.
                                            'Tis Rezenvelt.
   Let him be told that we are gone abroad.

De Mon.

 proudly .
   No! let him enter. Who waits there? Ho! Manuel!


Enter Manuel .
   What stranger speaks below?

Man.
                                            The Marquis Rezenvelt.
   I have not told him that you are within.

De Mon.

 angrily .
   And wherefore didst thou not? Let him ascend.


 A long pause . De Montfort walking up and down with a quickpace .

Enter Rezenvelt , who runs freely up to De Monfort .
Rez.

 to De Mon .
   My noble marquis, welcome!

De Mon.
                                            Sir, I thank you.

Rez.

 to Freb .
   My gentle friend, well met. Abroad so early?

Freb.
   It is indeed an early hour for me.
   How sits thy last night's revel on thy spirits?

Rez.
   O, light as ever. On my way to you,
   E'en now, I learnt De Montfort was arriv'd,
   And turn'd my steps aside; so here I am.


 Bowing gaily to De Monfort .
De Mon.
   I thank you, sir; you do me too much honour.


 Proudly .
Rez.
   Nay, say not so; not too much honour surely,
   Unless, indeed, 'tis more than pleases you.



 
De Mon.

 confused .
   Having no previous notice of your coming,
   I look'd not for it.

Rez.
   Ay, true indeed; when I approach you next,
   I'll send a herald to proclaim my coming,
   And bow to you by sound of trumpet, marquis.

De Mon.

 to Freb ., turning haughtily from Rezenvelt with affected indifference .
   How does your cheerful friend, that good old man?

Freb.
   My cheerful friend? I know not whom you mean.

De Mon.
   Count Waterlan.

Freb.
                                            I know not one so nam'd.

De Mon.

 very confused .
   O pardon me—it was at Basle I knew him.

Freb.
   You have not yet inquir'd for honest Reisdale.
   I met him as I came, and mention'd you.
   He seem'd amaz'd; and fain he would have learnt
   What cause procur'd us so much happiness.
   He question'd hard, and hardly would believe;
   I could not satisfy his strong desire.

Rez.
   And know you not what brings De Montfort here?

Freb.
   Truly I do not.

Rez.
                                            O! 'tis love of me.
   I have but two short days in Amberg been,
   And here with postman's speed he follows me,
   Finding his home so dull and tiresome grown.

Freb.

 to De Mon .
   Is Rezenvelt so sadly miss'd with you?
   Your town so chang'd?

De Mon.
                                            Not altogether so;
   Some witlings and jest-mongers still remain
   For fools to laugh at.

Rez.
   But he laughs not, and therefore he is wise.
   He ever frowns on them with sullen brow
   Contemptuous; therefore he is very wise;
   Nay, daily frets his most refined soul
   With their poor folly to its inmost core;
   Therefore he is most eminently wise.

Freb.
   Fy, Rezenvelt! you are too early gay.
   Such spirits rise but with the ev'ning glass:
   They suit not placid morn.

 To De Monfort , who, after walking impatiently up and down, comes close to his ear and lays hold of his arm .
                                            What would, you Monfort?

De Mon.
   Nothing—what is't o'clock?
   No, no—I had forgot—'tis early still.


 Turns away again .
Freb.

 to Rez .
   Waltser informs me that you have agreed
   To read his verses o'er, and tell the truth.
   It is a dangerous task.

Rez.
                                            Yet I'll be honest:
   I can but lose his favour and a feast.


 Whilst they speak , De Monfort walks up and down impatiently and irresolute: at last pulls the bell violently .

Enter Servant.
De Mon.

 to ser. 
   What dost thou want?

Ser.
                                            I thought your honour rung.

De Mon.
   I have forgot—stay. Are my horses saddled?

Ser.
   I thought, my lord, you would not ride to-day,
   After so long a journey.

De Mon.

 impatiently .
                                            Well—'tis good.
   Begone!—I want thee not.


 Exit servant .
Rez.

 smiling significantly .
   I humbly crave your pardon, gentle marquics.
   It grieves me that I cannot stay with you,
   And make my visit of a friendly length.
   I trust your goodness will excuse me now;
   Another time I shall be less unkind.

 To Freberg .
   Will you not go with me?

Freb.
   Excuse me, Monfort, I'll return again.


 Exeunt Rezenvelt and Freberg .
De Mon.

 alone, tossing his arms distractedly .
   Hell hath no greater torment for th' accurs'd
   Than this man's presence gives—
   Abhorred fiend! he hath a pleasure too,
   A damned pleasure in the pain he gives!
   Oh! the side glance of that detested eye!
   That conscious smile! that full insulting lip!
   It touches every nerve: it makes me mad.
   What, does it please thee? Dost thou woo my hate?
   Hate shalt thou have! determin'd, deadly hate,
   Which shall awake no smile. Malignant villain!
   The venom of thy mind is rank and devilish,
   And thin the film that hides it.
   Thy hateful visage ever spoke thy worth:
   I loath'd thee when a boy.
   That men should be besotted with him thus!
   And Freberg likewise so bewitched is,
   That like a hireling flatt'rer at his heels
   He meanly paces, off'ring brutish praise.
   O! I could curse him too!


 Exit .
ACT II. SCENE I.
A very splendid apartment in Count Freberg's house, fancifully decorated. A wide folding-door opened, shows another magnificent room lighted up to receive company. Enter through the folding doors the Count and Countess, richly dressed .
Freb.

 looking round .
   In truth, I like those decorations well:
   They suit those lofty walls. And here, my love,
   The gay profusion of a woman's fancy
   Is well display'd. Noble simplicity


 
   Becomes us less, on such a night as this,
   Than gaudy show.

Lady.
   Is it not noble then?
 He shakes his head .
I thought it so;
   And as I know you love simplicity,
   I did intend it should be simple too.

Freb.
   Be satisfied, I pray; we want to-night
   A cheerful banquet-house, and not a temple.
   How runs the hour?

Lady.
   It is not late, but soon we shall be rous'd
   With the loud entry of our frolic guests.


Enter a Page, richly dressed.
Page.
   Madam, there is a lady in your hall,
   Who begs to be admitted to your presence.

Lady.
   Is it not one of our invited friends?

Page.
   No, far unlike to them; it is a stranger.

Lady.
   How looks her countenance?

Page.
   So queenly, so commanding, and so noble,
   I shrunk at first in awe; but when she smil'd,
   For so she did to see me thus abash'd,
   Methought I could have compass'd sea and land
   To do her bidding.

Lady.
                                            Is she young or old?

Page.
   Neither, if right I guess; but she is fair:
   For Time hath laid his hand so gently on her,
   As he too had been aw'd.

Lady.
                                            The foolish stripling!
   She has bewitch'd thee. Is she large in stature?

Page.
   So stately and so graceful is her form,
   I thought at first her stature was gigantic;
   But on a near approach I found, in truth,
   She scarcely does surpass the middle size.

Lady.
   What is her garb?

Page.
   I cannot well describe the fashion of it.
   She is not deck'd in any gallant trim,
   But seems to me clad in the usual weeds
   Of high habitual state; for as she moves
   Wide flows her robe in many a waving fold,
   As I have seen unfurled banners play
   With a soft breeze.

Lady.
                                            Thine eyes deceive thee, boy;
   It is an apparition thou hast seen.

Freb.

 starting from his seat, where he has been sitting during the conversation between the lady and the page .
   It is an apparition he has seen,
   Or it is Jane De Monfort.


 Exit, hastily .
Lady

 displeased .
   No; such description surely suits not her.
   Did she inquire for me?

Page.
   She ask'd to see the lady of Count Freberg.

Lady.
   Perhaps it is not she—I fear it is—
   Ha! here they come. He has but guess'd too well.


Enter Freberg , leading in Jane De Monfort .
Freb.

 presenting her to lady .
   Here, madam, welcome a most worthy guest.

Lady.
   Madam, a thousand welcomes! Pardon me;
   I could not guess who honour'd me so far;
   I should not else have waited coldly here.

Jane.
   I thank you for this welcome, gentle countess.
   But take those kind excuses back again;
   I am a bold intruder on this hour,
   And am entitled to no ceremony.
   I came in quest of a dear truant friend,
   But Freberg has inform'd me—

 To Freberg. 
   And he is well, you say?

Freb.
   Yes, well, but joyless.

Jane.
   It is the usual temper of his mind;
   It opens not, but with the thrilling touch
   Of some strong heart-string o' the sudden press'd.

Freb.
   It may be so, I've known him otherwise:
   He is suspicious grown.

Jane.
   Not so, Count Freberg; Monfort is too noble.
   Say rather, that he is a man in grief,
   Wearing at times a strange and scowling eye;
   And thou, less generous than beseems a friend,
   Hast thought too hardly of him.

Freb.

 bowing with great respect .
                                            So will I say;
   I'll own nor word nor will, that can offend you.

Lady.
   De Monfort is engag'd to grace our feast:
   Ere long you'll see him here.

Jane.
   I thank you truly, but this homely dress
   Suits not the splendour of such scenes as these.

Freb.

 pointing to her dress .
   Such artless and majestic elegance,
   So exquisitely just, so nobly simple,
   Will make the gorgeous blush.

Jane

 smiling .
   Nay, nay, be more consistent, courteous knight,
   And do not praise a plain and simple guise
   With such profusion of unsimple words.
   I cannot join your company to-night.

Lady.
   Not stay to see your brother?

Jane.
   Therefore it is I would not, gentle hostess.
   Here will he find all that can woo the heart
   To joy and sweet forgetfulness of pain;
   The sight of me would wake his feeling mind
   To other thoughts. I am no doating mistress;
   No fond distracted wife, who must forthwith
   Rush to his arms and weep. I am his sister:
   The eldest daughter of his father's house:
   Calm and unwearied is my love for him;
   And having found him, patiently I'll wait,
   Nor greet him in the hour of social joy,
   To dash his mirth with tears.—
   The night wears on; permit me to withdraw.

Freb.
   Nay, do not, do not injure us so far!
   Disguise thyself, and join our friendly train.

Jane.
   You wear not masks to-night.

Lady.
   We wear not masks, but you may be con-ceal'd
   Behind the double foldings of a veil.



 
Jane

 after pausing to consider .
   In truth, I feel a little so inclin'd.
   Methinks unknown, I e'en might speak to him,
   And gently prove the temper of his mind;
   But for the means I must become your debtor.


 To lady .
Lady.
   Who waits?
 Enter her woman .
Attend this lady to my wardrobe,
   And do what she commands you.


 Exeunt Jane and waiting-woman .
Freb.

 looking after Jane , as she goes out, with admiration .
   Oh! what a soul she bears!
   See how she steps!
   Nought but the native dignity of worth
   E'er taught the moving form such noble grace.

Lady.
   Such lofty mien, and high assumed gait,
   I've seen ere now, and men have call'd it pride.

Freb.
   No, 'faith! thou never didst, but oft indeed
   The paltry imitation thou hast seen.

 Looking at her .
   How hang those trappings on thy motley gown?
   They seem like garlands on a May-day queen,
   Which hinds have dress'd in sport.


 Lady turns away displeased .
Freb.
   Nay, do not frown; I spoke it but in haste;
   For thou art lovely still in every garb.
   But see, the guests assemble.


Enter groups of well-dressed people, who pay their compliments to Freberg and his lady; and, followed by her, pass into the inner apartment, where more company appear assembling, as if by another entry .
Freb.

 who remains on the front of the stage with a friend or two .
   How loud the hum of this gay-meeting crowd!
   'Tis like a bee-swarm in the noonday sun.
   Music will quell the sound. Who waits without?
   Music strike up.


 Music, and when it ceases, enter from the inner apartment Rezenvelt , with several gentlemen, all richly dressed .
Freb.

 to those just entered .
   What, lively gallants, quit the field so soon?
   Are there no beauties in that moving crowd
   To fix your fancy?

Rez.
   Ay, marry are there! men of ev'ry fancy
   May in that moving crowd some fair one find
   To suit their taste, though whimsical and strange,
   As ever fancy own'd.
   Beauty of every cast and shade is there,
   From the perfection of a faultless form,
   Down to the common, brown, unnoted maid,
   Who looks but pretty in her Sunday gown.

st gent.
   There is, indeed, a gay variety.

Rez.
   And if the liberality of nature
   Suffices not, there's store of grafted charms,
   Blending in one the sweets of many plants,
   So obstinately, strangely opposite,
   As would have well defied all other art
   But female cultivation. Aged youth,
   With borrowed locks, in rosy chaplets bound,
   Clothes her dim eye, parch'd lips, and skinny cheek
   In most unlovely softness:
   And youthful age, with fat round trackless face,
   The downcast look of contemplation deep
   Most pensively assumes.
   Is it not even so? The native prude,
   With forced laugh, and merriment uncouth,
   Plays off the wild coquette's successful charms
   With most unskilful pains; and the coquette,
   In temporary crust of cold reserve,
   Fixes her studied looks upon the ground,
   Forbiddingly demure.

Freb.
   Fy! thou art too severe.

Rez.
                                            Say, rather, gentle.
   I 'faith! the very dwarfs attempt to charm
   With lofty airs of puny majesty;
   While potent damsels, of a portly make,
   Totter like nurslings, and demand the aid
   Of gentle sympathy.
   From all those diverse modes of dire assault,
   He owns a heart of hardest adamant,
   Who shall escape to-night.

Freb.

 to De Mon ., who has entered during Rezenvelt' s speech, and heard the greatest part of it .
                                            Ha, ha, ha, ha!
   How pleasantly he gives his wit the rein,
   Yet guides its wild career!


 De Mon . is silent .
Rez.

 smiling archly .
   What, think you, Freberg, the same powerful spell
   Of transformation reigns o'er all to-night?
   Or that De Monfort is a woman turn'd,—
   So widely from his native self to swerve,
   As grace my folly with a smile of his?

De Mon.
   Nay, think not, Rezenvelt, there is no smile
   I can bestow on thee. There is a smile,
   A smile of nature too, which I can spare,
   And yet, perhaps, thou wilt not thank me for it.


 Smiles contemptuously .
Rez.
   Not thank thee! It were surely most ungrateful
   No thanks to pay for nobly giving me
   What, well we see, has cost thee so much pain.
   For nature hath her smiles of birth more painful
   Than bitt'rest execrations.

Freb.
   These idle words will lead us to disquiet:
   Forbear, forbear, my friends! Go, Rezenvelt,
   Accept the challenge of those lovely dames,
   Who through the portal come with bolder steps
   To claim your notice.


Enter a group of ladies from the other apartment, who walk slowly across the bottom of the stage, and return to it again . Rez . shrugs up his shoulders, as if unwilling to go .


 
st gent.

 to Rez. 
   Behold in sable veil a lady comes,
   Whose noble air doth challenge fancy's skill
   To suit it with a countenance as goodly.


 Pointing to Jane De Mon ., who now enters in a thick black veil .
Rez.
   Yes, this way lies attraction.

 To Freb .
   With permission—

 Going up to Jane .
   Fair lady, though within that envious shroud
   Your beauty deigns not to enlighten us,
   We bid you welcome, and our beauties here
   Will welcome you the more for such concealment.
   With the permission of our noble host—


 Taking her hand, and leading her to the front of the stage .
Jane.

 to Freb .
   Pardon me this presumption, courteous sir:
   I thus appear
 pointing to her veil ,
not careless of respect
   Unto the generous lady of the feast.
   Beneath this veil no beauty shrouded is,
   That, now, or pain, or pleasure can bestow.
   Within the friendly cover of its shade
   I only wish, unknown, again to see
   One who, alas! is heedless of my pain.

De Mon.
   Yes, it is ever thus. Undo that veil,
   And give thy count'nance to the cheerful light.
   Men now all soft and female beauty scorn,
   And mock the gentle cares which aim to please.
   It is most damnable! undo thy veil,
   And think of him no more.

Jane.
   I know it well: e'en to a proverb grown,
   Is lovers' faith, and I had borne such slight:
   But he, who has, alas! forsaken me,
   Was the companion of my early days,
   My cradle's mate, mine infant play-fellow.
   Within our op'ning minds, with riper years,
   The love of praise and gen'rous virtue sprung:
   Through varied life our pride, our joys were one;
   At the same tale we wept: he is my brother.

De Mon.
   And he forsook thee?—No, I dare not curse him:
   My heart upbraids me with a crime like his.

Jane.
   Ah! do not thus distress a feeling heart.
   All sisters are not to the soul entwin'd
   With equal bands; thine has not watch'd for thee,
   Wept for thee, cheer'd thee, shar'd thy weal and woe,
   As I have done for him.

De Mon.

 eagerly .
                                            Ah! has she not?
   By heav'n the sum of all thy kindly deeds
   Were but as chaff pois'd against massy gold,
   Compar'd to that which I do owe her love.
   Oh, pardon me! I mean not to offend—
   I am too warm—but she of whom I speak
   Is the dear sister of my earliest love;
   In noble, virtuous worth to none a second:
   And though behind those sable folds were hid
   As fair a face as ever woman own'd,
   Still would I say she is as fair as thou.
   How oft amidst the beauty-blazing throng,
   I've proudly to th' inquiring stranger told
   Her name and lineage! yet within her house,
   The virgin mother of an orphan race
   Her dying parents left, this noble woman
   Did, like a Roman matron, proudly sit,
   Despising all the blandishments of love;
   While many a youth his hopeless love conceal'd,
   Or, humbly distant, woo'd her like a queen.
   Forgive, I pray you! O forgive this boasting!
   In faith! I mean you no discourtesy.

Jane

 off her guard, in a soft natural tone of voice .
   Oh, no! nor do me any.

De Mon.
   What voice speaks now? Withdraw, withdraw this shade!
   For if thy face bear semblance to thy voice,
   I'll fall and worship thee. Pray! pray undo!


 Puts forth his hand eagerly to snatch away the veil, whilst she shrinks back, and Rezenvelt steps between to prevent him .
Rez.
   Stand off: no hand shall lift this sacred veil.

De Mon.
   What, dost thou think De Monfort fall'n so low,
   That there may live a man beneath heav'n's roof,
   Who dares to say, he shall not?

Rez.
   He lives who dares to say—

Jane

 throwing back her veil, much alarmed, and rushing between them .
                                            Forbear, forbear!


 Rezenvelt , very much struck, steps back respectfully, and makes her a low bow . De Monfort stands for a while motionless, gazing upon her, till she, looking expressively to him, extends her arms, and he, rushing into them, bursts into tears . Freberg seems very much pleased. The company then advancing from the inner apartment, gather about them, and the scene closes .
SCENE II.
De Monfort 's apartments. Enter De Monfort , with a disordered air, and his hand pressed upon his forehead, followed by Jane .
De Mon.
   No more, my sister, urge me not again:
   My secret troubles cannot be reveal'd.
   From all participation of its thoughts
   My heart recoils: I pray thee be contented.

Jane.
   What, must I, like a distant humble friend,
   Observe thy restless eye, and gait disturb'd,
   In timid silence, whilst with yearning heart
   I turn aside to weep? O no! De Monfort!
   A nobler task thy nobler mind will give;
   Thy true entrusted friend I still shall be.



 
De Mon.
   Ah, Jane, forbear! I cannot e'en to thee.

Jane.
   Then, fy upon it! fy upon it, Monfort!
   There was a time when e'en with murder stain'd,
   Had it been possible that such dire deed
   Could e'er have been the crime of one so piteous,
   Thou wouldst have told it me.

De Mon.
   So would I now—but ask of this no more.
   All other trouble but the one I feel
   I had disclos'd to thee. I pray thee spare me.
   It is the secret weakness of my nature.

Jane.
   Then secret let it be; I urge no farther.
   The eldest of our valiant father's hopes,
   So sadly orphan'd, side by side we stood,
   Like two young trees, whose boughs in early strength
   Screen the weak saplings of the rising grove,
   And brave the storm together—
   I have so long, as if by nature's right,
   Thy bosom's inmate and adviser been,
   I thought through life I should have so remain'd,
   Nor ever known a change. Forgive me, Monfort,
   A humbler station will I take by thee:
   The close attendant of thy wand'ring steps;
   The cheerer of this home, with strangers sought;
   The soother of those griefs I must not know:
   This is mine office now: I ask no more.

De Mon.
   Oh, Jane! thou dost constrain me with thy love!
   Would I could tell it thee!

Jane.
   Thou shalt not tell me. Nay I'll stop mine ears,
   Nor from the yearnings of affection wring
   What shrinks from utt'rance. Let it pass, my brother.
   I'll stay by thee; I'll cheer thee, comfort thee:
   Pursue with thee the study of some art,
   Or nobler science, that compels the mind
   To steady thought progressive, driving forth
   All floating, wild, unhappy fantasies;
   Till thou, with brow unclouded, smil'st again;
   Like one who, from dark visions of the night,
   When th' active soul within its lifeless cell
   Holds it own world, with dreadful fancy press'd
   Of some dire, terrible, or murd'rous deed,
   Wakes to the dawning morn, and blesses heaven.

De Mon.
   It will not pass away; 'twill haunt me still.

Jane.
   Ah! say not so, for I will haunt thee too;
   And be to it so close an adversary,
   That, though I wrestle darkling with the fiend,
   I shall o'ercome it.

De Mon.
                                            Thou most gen'rous woman!
   Why do I treat thee thus? It should not be—
   And yet I cannot—O that cursed villain!
   He will not let me be the man I would.

Jane.
   What sayst thou, brother? Oh! what words are these?
   They have awak'd my soul to dreadful thoughts.
   I do beseech thee, speak!

 He shakes his head, and turns from her; she following him .
   By the affection thou didst ever bear me;
   By the dear mem'ry of our infant days;
   By kindred living ties, ay, and by those
   Who sleep i' the tomb, and cannot call to thee,
   I do conjure thee, speak!

 He waves her off with his hand and covers his face with the other, still turning from her .
                                            Ah! wilt thou not?

 Assuming dignity .
   Then, if affection, most unwearied love,
   Tried early, long, and never wanting found,
   O'er gen'rous man hath more authority,
   More rightful power than crown or sceptre give,
   I do command thee.

 He throws himself into a chair, greatly agitated .
   De Monfort, do not thus resist my love.
   Here I entreat thee on my bended knees.

 Kneeling .
   Alas! my brother!


 De Monfort starts up, and catching her in his arms, raises her up, then placing her in the chair, kneels at her feet .
De Mon.
   Thus let him kneel who should the abased be,
   And at thine honour'd feet confession make!
   I'll tell thee all—but, oh! thou wilt despise me.
   For in my breast a raging passion burns,
   To which thy soul no sympathy will own—
   A passion which hath made my nightly couch
   A place of torment; and the light of day,
   With the gay intercourse of social man,
   Feel like th' oppressive airless pestilence.
   O Jane! thou wilt despise me.

Jane.
                                            Say not so:
   I never can despise thee, gentle brother.
   A lover's jealousy and hopeless pangs
   No kindly heart contemns.

De Mon
                                            A lover, sayst thou?
   No, it is hate! black, lasting, deadly hate!
   Which thus hath driven me forth from kindred peace,
   From social pleasure, from my native home,
   To be a sullen wand'rer on the earth,
   Avoiding all men, cursing and accurs'd.

Jane.
   De Monfort, this is fiend-like, frightful, terrible!
   What being, by th' Almighty Father form'd,
   Of flesh and blood, created even as thou,
   Could in thy breast such horrid tempest wake,
   Who art thyself his fellow?
   Unknit thy brows, and spread those wrath-clench'd hands.
   Some sprite accurs'd within thy bosom mates
   To work thy ruin. Strive with it, my brother!
   Strive bravely with it; drive it from thy breast;


 
   'Tis the degrader of a noble heart:
   Curse it, and bid it part.

De Mon.
   It will not part.
 His hand on his breast .
I've lodg'd it here too long:
   With my first cares I felt its rankling touch;
   I loath'd him when a boy.

Jane.
   Whom didst thou say?

De Mon.
                                            Oh! that detested Rezenvelt!
   E'en in our early sports, like two young whelps
   Of hostile breed, instinctively reverse,
   Each 'gainst the other pitch'd his ready pledge,
   And frown'd defiance. As we onward pass'd
   From youth to man's estate, his narrow art
   And envious gibing malice, poorly veil'd
   In the affected carelessness of mirth,
   Still more detestable and odious grew.
   There is no living being on this earth
   Who can conceive the malice of his soul,
   With all his gay and damned merriment,
   To those, by fortune or by merit plac'd
   Above his paltry self. When, low in fortune,
   He look'd upon the state of prosp'rous men,
   As nightly birds, rous'd from their murky holes,
   Do scowl and chatter at the light of day,
   I could endure it; even as we bear
   Th' impotent bite of some half-trodden worm,
   I could endure it. But when honours came,
   And wealth and new-got titles fed his pride;
   Whilst flatt'ring knaves did trumpet forth his praise,
   And grov'ling idiots grinn'd applauses on him;
   Oh! then I could no longer suffer it!
   It drove me frantic.—What! what would I give!
   What would I give to crush the bloated toad,
   So rankly do I loathe him!

Jane.
   And would thy hatred crush the very man
   Who gave to thee that life he might have ta'en;
   That life which thou so rashly didst expose
   To aim at his? Oh! this is horrible!

De Mon.
   Ha! thou hast heard it, then? From all the world,
   But most of all from thee, I thought it hid.

Jane.
   I heard a secret whisper, and resolv'd
   Upon the instant to return to thee.
   Didst thou receive my letter?

De Mon.
   I did! I did! 'twas that which drove me hither.
   I could not bear to meet thine eye again.

Jane.
   Alas! that, tempted by a sister's tears,
   I ever left thy house! These few past months,
   These absent months, have brought us all this woe.
   Had I remain'd with thee it had not been.
   And yet, methinks, it should not move you thus.
   You dar'd him to the field; both bravely fought;
   He more adroit disarm'd you; courteously
   Return'd the forfeit sword, which, so return'd,
   You did refuse to use against him more;
   And then, as says report, you parted friends.

De Mon.
   When he disarm'd this curs'd, this worthless hand
   Of its most worthless weapon, he but spar'd
   From dev'lish pride, which now derives a bliss
   In seeing me thus fetter'd, sham'd, subjected
   With the vile favour of his poor forbearance;
   While he securely sits with gibing brow,
   And basely bates me like a muzzled cur
   Who cannot turn again.—
   Until that day, till that accursed day,
   I knew not half the torment of this hell,
   Which burns within my breast. Heaven's lightnings blast him!

Jane.
   O this is horrible! Forbear, forbear!
   Lest heaven's vengeance light upon thy head,
   For this most impious wish.

De Mon.
                                            Then let it light.
   Torments more fell than I have felt already
   It cannot send. To be annihilated,
   What all men shrink from; to be dust, be nothing,
   Were bliss to me, compar'd to what I am!

Jane.
   Oh! wouldst thou kill me with these dreadful words?

De Mon.

 raising his hands to heaven .
   Let me but once upon his ruin look,
   Then close mine eyes for ever!

 Jane , in great distress, staggers back, and supports herself upon the side scene . De Mon ., alarmed, runs up to her with a softened voice .
   Ha! how is this? thou'rt ill; thou'rt very pale.
   What have I done to thee? Alas, alas!
   I meant not to distress thee.—O my sister!

Jane

 shaking her head .
   I cannot speak to thee.

De Mon.
                                            I have kill'd thee.
   Turn, turn thee not away! look on me still!
   Oh! droop not thus, my life, my pride, my sister;
   Look on me yet again.

Jane.
                                            Thou too, De Monfort,
   In better days, wert wont to be my pride.

De Mon.
   I am a wretch, most wretched in myself,
   And still more wretched in the pain I give.
   O curse that villain! that detested villain!
   He has spread mis'ry o'er my fated life:
   He will undo us all.

Jane.
   I've held my warfare through a troubled world,
   And borne with steady mind my share of ill;
   For thou wert then the helpmate of my toil.
   But now the wane of life comes darkly on,
   And hideous passion tears me from thy heart,
   Blasting thy worth.—I cannot strive with this.

De Mon.

 affectionately .
   What shall I do?

Jane.
                                            Call up thy noble spirit;
   Rouse all the gen'rous energy of virtue;
   And with the strength of heaven-endued man,
   Repel the hideous foe. Be great; be valiant.
   O, if thou couldst! e'en shrouded as thou art
   In all the sad infirmities of nature,
   What a most noble creature wouldst thou be!

De Mon.
   Ay, if I could: alas! alas! I cannot.



 
Jane.
   Thou canst, thou mayst, thou wilt.
   We shall not part till I have turn'd thy soul.


Enter Manuel .
De Mon.
   Ha! some one enters. Wherefore com'st thou here?

Man.
   Count Freberg waits your leisure.

De Mon.

 angrily .
   Begone, begone!—I cannot see him now.


 Exit Manuel .
Jane.
   Come to my closet; free from all intrusion,
   I'll school thee there; and thou again shalt be
   My willing pupil, and my gen'rous friend,
   The noble Monfort I have lov'd so long,
   And must not, will not lose.

De Mon.
   Do as thou wilt; I will not grieve thee more.


 Exeunt .
ACT III. SCENE I. 
Countess Freberg' s dressing-room. Enter the Countess dispirited and out of humour, and throws herself into a chair: enter, by the opposite side , Theresa .
Ther.
   Madam, I am afraid you are unwell:
   What is the matter? does your head ache?

Lady

 peevishly .
                                            No,
   'Tis not my head: concern thyself no more
   With what concerns not thee.

Ther.
   Go you abroad to-night?

Lady.
   Yes, thinkest thou I'll stay and fret at home?

Ther.
   Then please to say what you would choose to wear:—
   One of your newest robes?

Lady.
                                            I hate them all.

Ther.
   Surely that purple scarf became you well,
   With all those wreaths of richly-hanging flowers.
   Did I not overhear them say, last night,
   As from the crowded ball-room ladies pass'd,
   How gay and handsome, in her costly dress,
   The Countess Freberg look'd?

Lady.
                                            Didst thou o'erhear it?

Ther.
   I did, and more than this.

Lady.
   Well, all are not so greatly prejudic'd;
   All do not think me like a May-day queen,
   Which peasants deck in sport.

Ther.
                                            And who said this?

Lady

 putting her handkerchief to her eyes .
   E'en my good lord, Theresa.

Ther.
   He said it but in jest. He loves you well.

Lady.
   I know as well as thou he loves me well.
   But what of that! he takes in me no pride:
   Elsewhere his praise and admiration go,
   And Jane De Monfort is not mortal woman.

Ther.
   The wondrous character this lady bears
   For worth and excellence: from early youth
   The friend and mother of her younger sisters,
   Now greatly married, as I have been told,
   From her most prudent care, may well excuse
   The admiration of so good a man
   As my good master is. And then, dear madam,
   I must confess, when I myself did hear
   How she was come through the rough winter's storm,
   To seek and comfort an unhappy brother,
   My heart beat kindly to her.

Lady.
   Ay, ay, there is a charm in this I find:
   But wherefore may she not have come as well
   Through wintry storms to seek a lover too?

Ther.
   No, madam, no, I could not think of this.

Lady.
   That would reduce her in your eyes, mayhap,
   To woman's level.—Now I see my vengeance!
   I'll tell it round that she is hither come,
   Under pretence of finding out De Monfort,
   To meet with Rezenvelt. When Freberg hears it,
   'Twill help, I ween, to break this magic charm.

Ther.
   And say what is not, madam?

Lady.
   How canst thou know that I shall say what is not?
   'Tis like enough I shall but speak the truth.

Ther.
   Ah, no! there is—

Lady.
                                            Well, hold thy foolish tongue.

 Freberg's voice is heard without. After hesitating .
   I will not see him now.


 Exit .

 Enter Freberg by the opposite side, passing on hastily .
Ther.
   Pardon, my lord; I fear you are in haste.
   Yet must I crave that you will give to me
   The books my lady mention'd to you: she
   Has charg'd me to remind you.

Freb.
                                            I'm in haste.


 Passing on .
Ther.
   Pray you, my lord: your countess wants them much:
   The Lady Jane De Monfort ask'd them of her.

Freb.

 returning instantly .
   Are they for her? I knew not this before.
   I will, then, search them out immediately.
   There is nought good or precious in my keeping,
   That is not dearly honour'd by her use.

Ther.
   My lord, what would your gentle countess say,
   If she o'erheard her own request neglected,
   Until supported by a name more potent?

Freb.
   Thinkst thou she is a fool, my good Theresa,
   Vainly to please herself with childish thoughts
   Of matching what is matchless—Jane De Monfort?
   Thinkst thou she is a fool, and cannot see,


 
   That love and admiration often thrive
   Though far apart?


 Re-enter lady with great violence .
Lady.
                                            I am a fool, not to have seen full well,
   That thy best pleasure in o'er-rating so
   This lofty stranger, is to humble me,
   And cast a dark'ning shadow o'er my head.
   Ay, wherefore dost thou stare upon me thus?
   Art thou asham'd that I have thus surpris'd thee?
   Well mayst thou be so!

Freb.
                                            True; thou rightly sayst.
   Well may I be asham'd: not for the praise
   Which I have ever openly bestow'd
   On Monfort's noble sister; but that thus,
   Like a poor mean and jealous listener,
   She should be found, who is Count Freberg's wife.

Lady.
   Oh, I am lost and ruin'd! hated, scorn'd!


 Pretending to faint .
Freb.
   Alas, I have been too rough!

 Taking her hand and kissing it tenderly .
   My gentle love! my own, my only love!
   See, she revives again. How art thou, love?
   Support her to her chamber, good Theresa.
   I'll sit and watch by her. I've been too rough.


 Exeunt; lady supported by Freb . and Ther .
SCENE II.
De Monfort discovered sitting by a table reading. After a little time he lays down his book, and continues in a thoughtful posture Enter to him Jane De Monfort .
Jane.
   Thanks, gentle brother.—

 Pointing to the book .
   Thy willing mind has rightly been employ'd:
   Did not thy heart warm at the fair display
   Of peace and concord and forgiving love?

De Mon.
   I know resentment may to love be turn'd,
   Though keen and lasting, into love as strong:
   And fiercest rivals in th' ensanguin'd field
   Have cast their brandish'd weapons to the ground,
   Joining their mailed breasts in close embrace,
   With gen'rous impulse fir'd. I know right well
   The darkest, fellest wrongs have been forgiven
   Seventy times o'er from blessed heav'nly love:
   I've heard of things like these; I've heard and wept.
   But what is this to me?

Jane.
                                            All, all, my brother!
   It bids thee too that noble precept learn,
   To love thine enemy.

De Mon.
   Th' uplifted stroke that would a wretch destroy,
   Gorg'd with my richest spoil, stain'd with my blood,
   I would arrest, and cry, “Hold! hold! have mercy.”
   But when the man most adverse to my nature,
   Who e'en from childhood hath, with rude malevolence,
   Withheld the fair respect all paid beside,
   Turning my very praise into derision,
   Who galls and presses me where'er I go,
   Would claim the gen'rous feelings of my heart,
   Nature herself doth lift her voice aloud,
   And cry, “It is impossible!”

Jane.

 shaking her head .
   Ah, Monfort, Monfort!

De Mon.
   I can forgive th' envenom'd reptile's sting,
   But hate his loathsome self.

Jane.
   And canst thou do no more for love of heaven?

De Mon.
   Alas! I cannot now so school my mind
   As holy men have taught, nor search it truly:
   But this, my Jane, I'll do for love of thee;
   And more it is than crowns could win me to,
   Or any power but thine. I'll see the man.
   Th' indignant risings of abhorrent nature;
   The stern contraction of my scowling brows,
   That like the plant whose closing leaves do shrink
   At hostile touch, still knit at his approach;
   The crooked curving lip, by instinct taught,
   In imitation of disgustful things,
   To pout and swell, I strictly will repress;
   And meet him with a tamed countenance,
   E'en as a townsman, who would live at peace,
   And pay him the respect his station claims.
   I'll crave his pardon too for all offence
   My dark and wayward temper may have done.
   Nay more, I will confess myself his debtor
   For the forbearance I have curs'd so oft:
   Life spar'd by him, more horrid than the grave
   With all its dark corruption! This I'll do.
   Will it suffice thee? More than this I cannot.

Jane.
   No more than this do I require of thee
   In outward act, though in thy heart, my friend,
   I hop'd a better change, and yet will hope.
   I told thee Freberg had propos'd a meeting.

De Mon.
   I know it well.

Jane.
                                            And Rezenvelt consents.
   He meets you here; so far he shows respect.

De Mon.
   Well, let it be; the sooner past the better.

Jane.
   I'm glad to hear you say so, for, in truth,
   He has propos'd for it an early hour.
   'Tis almost near his time; I came to tell you.

De Mon.
   What, comes he here so soon? shame on his speed!
   It is not decent thus to rush upon me.
   He loves the secret pleasure he will feel
   To see me thus subdued.

Jane.
   O say not so! he comes with heart sincere.

De Mon.
   Could we not meet elsewhere? from home—i' the fields,
   Where other men—must I alone receive him?
   Where is your agent, Freberg, and his friends,
   That I must meet him here?

 Walks up and down, very much disturbed .
   Now! didst thou say?—how goes the hour?—e'en now!
   I would some other friend were first arriv'd.



 
Jane.
   See, to thy wish come Freberg and his dame.

De Mon.
   His lady too! why comes he not alone?
   Must all the world upon our meeting stare?


Enter Count Freberg and his Countess .
Freb.
   A happy morrow to my noble marquis,
   And his most noble sister!

Jane.
                                            Gen'rous Freberg,
   Your face, methinks, forebodes a happy morn,
   Open and cheerful. What of Rezenvelt?

Freb.
   I left him at his home, prepar'd to follow:
   He'll soon appear.
 To De Monfort .
And now, my worthy friend,
   Give me your hand; this happy change delights me.


 De Monfort gives him his hand coldly, and they walk to the bottom of the stage together, in earnest discourse, whilst Jane and the Countess remain in the front .
Lady.
   My dearest madam, will you pardon me?
   I know Count Freberg's bus'ness with De Monfort,
   And had a strong desire to visit you,
   So much I wish the honour of your friendship;
   For he retains no secret from mine ear.

Jane

 archly .
   Knowing your prudence—you are welcome, madam;
   So shall Count Freberg's lady ever be.


 De Monfort and Freberg returning towards the front of the stage, still engaged in discourse .
Freb.
   He is indeed a man, within whose breast
   Firm rectitude and honour hold their seat,
   Though unadorned with that dignity
   Which were their fittest garb. Now, on my life!
   I know no truer heart than Rezenvelt.

De Mon.
   Well, Freberg, well, there needs not all this pains
   To garnish out his worth: let it suffice;
   I am resolv'd I will respect the man,
   As his fair station and repute demand.
   Methinks I see not at your jolly feasts
   The youthful knight, who sang so pleasantly.

Freb.
   A pleasant circumstance detains him hence;
   Pleasant to those who love high gen'rous deeds
   Above the middle pitch of common minds;
   And, though I have been sworn to secrecy,
   Yet must I tell it thee.
   This knight is near akin to Rezenvelt,
   To whom an old relation, short while dead,
   A good estate bequeathed, some leagues distant.
   But Rezenvelt, now rich in fortune's store,
   Disdain'd the sordid love of further gain,
   And gen'rously the rich bequest resign'd
   To this young man, blood of the same degree
   To the deceas'd, and low in fortune's gifts,
   Who is from hence to take possession of it:
   Was it not nobly done?

De Mon.
                                            'Twas right and honourable.
   This morning is oppressive, warm, and heavy:
   There hangs a foggy closeness in the air;
   Dost thou not feel it?

Freb.
   O no! to think upon a gen'rous deed
   Expands my soul, and makes me lightly breathe.

De Mon.
   Who gives the feast to-night? His name escapes me.
   You say I am invited.

Freb.
                                            Old Count Waterlan.
   In honour of your townsman's gen'rous gift,
   He spreads the board.

De Mon.
   He is too old to revel with the gay.

Freb.
   But not too old is he to honour virtue.
   I shall partake of it with open soul;
   For, on my honest faith, of living men
   I know not one, for talents, honour, worth,
   That I should rank superior to Rezenvelt.

De Mon.
   How virtuous he hath been in three short days!

Freb.
   Nay, longer, marquis; but my friendship rests
   Upon the good report of other men,
   And that has told me much.

 De Monfort aside, going some steps hastily from Freberg , and rending his cloak with agitation as he goes .
   Would he were come! by heav'n I would he were!
   This fool besets me so.

 Suddenly correcting himself, and joining the ladies, who have retired to the bottom of the stage, he speaks to Countess Freberg with affected cheerfulness .
   The sprightly dames of Amberg rise by times,
   Untarnish'd with the vigils of the night.

Lady.
   Praise us not rashly, 'tis not always so.

De Mon.
   He does not rashly praise who praises you;
   For he were dull indeed—


 Stopping short, as if he heard something .
Lady.
                                            How dull indeed?

De Mon.
   I should have said—It has escap'd me now—


 Listening again, as if he heard something .
Jane

 to De Mon .
   What, hear you aught?

De Mon.

 hastily .
                                            'Tis nothing.

Lady

 to De Mon .
   Nay, do not let me lose it so, my lord.
   Some fair one has bewitch'd your memory,
   And robs me of the half-form'd compliment.

Jane.
   Half-utter'd praise is to the curious mind
   As to the eye half-veiled beauty is,
   More precious than the whole. Pray pardon him.
   Some one approaches.


 Listening .
Freb.
   No, no, it is a servant who ascends;
   He will not come so soon.

De Mon.

 off his guard .
   'Tis Rezenvelt: I heard his well-known foot,
   From the first staircase, mounting step by step.



 
Freb.
   How quick an ear thou hast for distant sound!
   I heard him not.


 De Monfort looks embarrassed, and is silent .

Enter Rezenvelt .

 De Monfort , recovering himself, goes up to receive Rezenvelt , who meets him with a cheerful countenance .
De Mon.

 to Rez 
   I am, my lord, beholden to you greatly.
   This ready visit makes me much your debtor.

Rez.
   Then may such debts between us, noble marquis,
   Be oft incurr'd, and often paid again!

 To Jane .
   Madam, I am devoted to your service,
   And ev'ry wish of yours commands my will.

 To Countess .
   Lady, good morning.
 To Freb .
Well, my gentle friend,
   You see I have not linger'd long behind.

Freb.
   No, thou art sooner than I look'd for thee.

Rez.
   A willing heart adds feather to the heel,
   And makes the clown a winged Mercury.

De Mon.
   Then let me say, that, with a grateful mind,
   I do receive these tokens of good will;
   And must regret, that, in my wayward moods,
   I have too oft forgot the due regard
   Your rank and talents claim.

Rez.
                                            No, no, De Monfort,
   You have but rightly curb'd a wanton spirit,
   Which makes me too neglectful of respect.
   Let us be friends, and think of this no more.

Freb.
   Ay, let it rest with the departed shades
   Of things which are no more; whilst lovely concord,
   Follow'd by friendship sweet, and firm esteem,
   Your future days enrich. O heavenly friendship!
   Thou dost exalt the sluggish souls of men,
   By thee conjoin'd, to great and glorious deeds;
   As two dark clouds, when mix'd in middle air,
   With vivid lightnings flash, and roar sublime.
   Talk not of what is past, but future love.

De Mon.

 with dignity .
   No, Freberg, no, it must not.
 To Rezenvelt .
No, my lord,
   I will not offer you an hand of concord,
   And poorly hide the motives which constrain me.
   I would that, not alone, these present friends,
   But ev'ry soul in Amberg were assembled,
   That I, before them all, might here declare
   I owe my spared life to your forbearance.

 Holding out his hand .
   Take this from one who boasts no feeling warmth,
   But never will deceive.


 Jane smiles upon De Monfort with great approbation, and Rezenvelt runs up to him with open arms .
Rez.
   Away with hands! I'll have thee to my breast.
   Thou art, upon my faith, a noble spirit!

De Mon.

 shrinking back from him .
   Nay, if you please, I am not so prepar'd—
   My nature is of temperature too cold—
   I pray you pardon me

 Jane's countenance changes .
   But take this hand, the token of respect;
   The token of a will inclin'd to concord;
   The token of a mind, that bears within
   A sense impressive of the debt it owes you:
   And cursed be its power, unnerv'd its strength,
   If e'er again it shall be lifted up
   To do you any harm!

Rez.
   Well, be it so, De Monfort, I'm contented;
   I'll take thy hand, since I can have no more.

 Carelessly .
   I take of worthy men whate'er they give.
   Their heart I gladly take, if not their hand;
   If that too is withheld, a courteous word,
   Or the civility of placid looks:
   And, if e'en these are too great favours deem'd,
   'Faith, I can set me down contentedly
   With plain and homely greeting, or “God save ye!”

De Mon.

 aside, starting away from him some paces .
   By the good light, he makes a jest of it!


 Jane seems greatly distressed, and Freberg endeavours to cheer her .
Freb.

 to Jane .
   Cheer up, my noble friend; all will go well;
   For friendship is no plant of hasty growth.
   Though rooted in esteem's deep soil, the slow
   And gradual culture of kind intercourse
   Must bring it to perfection.

 To the Countess .
   My love, the morning, now, is far advane'd;
   Our friends elsewhere expect us; take your leave.

Lady

 to Jane .
   Farewell, dear madam, till the evening hour.

Freb.

 to De Mon .
   Good day, De Monfort.

 To Jane .
   Most devoutly yours.

Rez.

 to Freb .
   Go not too fast, for I will follow you.
 Exeunt Freberg and his lady .

 To Jane .

   The Lady Jane is yet a stranger here:
   She might, perhaps, in this your ancient city
   Find somewhat worth her notice.

Jane.
   I thank you, marquis, I am much engag'd;
   I go not out to-day.

Rez.
   Then fare ye well! I see I cannot now
   Be the proud man who shall escort you forth,
   And show to all the world my proudest boast,
   The notice and respect of Jane de Monfort.

De Mon.

 aside impatiently .
   He says farewell, and goes not!

Jane

 to Rez ..
   You do me honour.

Rez.
   Madam, adieu!
 To Jane .
Good morning, noble marquis.


 Jane and De Monfort look expressively to one another, without speaking, and then exeunt severally .


 
ACT IV. SCENE I.
A hall or antechamber, with the folding doors of an inner apartment open, which discovers the guests rising from a banquet. They enter and pass over the stage, and exeunt; and after them enter Rezenvelt and Freberg .
Freb.
   Alas, my Rezenvelt!
   I vainly hop'd the hand of gentle peace,
   From this day's reconciliation sprung,
   These rude unseemly jarrings had subdu'd;
   But I have mark'd, e'en at the social board,
   Such looks, such words, such tones, such untold things,
   Too plainly told, 'twixt you and Monfort pass,
   That I must now despair.
   Yet who could think, two minds so much refin'd,
   So near in excellence, should be remov'd,
   So far remov'd, in gen'rous sympathy?

Rez.
   Ay, far remov'd indeed!

Freb.
   And yet, methought, he made a noble effort,
   And with a manly plainness bravely told
   The galling debt he owes to your forbearance.

Rez.
   'Faith! so he did, and so did I receive it;
   When, with spread arms, and heart e'en mov'd to tears,
   I frankly proffer'd him a friend's embrace:
   And, I declare, had he as such receiv'd it,
   I from that very moment had forborne
   All opposition, pride-provoking jest,
   Contemning carelessness, and all offence;
   And had caress'd him as a worthy heart,
   From native weakness such indulgence claiming.
   But since he proudly thinks that cold respect,
   The formal tokens of his lordly favour,
   So precious are, that I would sue for them
   As fair distinction in the public eye,
   Forgetting former wrongs, I spurn it all.
   And but that I do bear that noble woman,
   His worthy, his incomparable sister,
   Such fix'd, profound regard, I would expose him;
   And, as a mighty bull, in senseless rage,
   Rous'd at the baiter's will, with wretched rags
   Of ire-provoking scarlet, chafes and bellows,
   I'd make him at small cost of paltry wit,
   With all his deep and manly faculties,
   The scorn and laugh of fools.

Freb.
   For heaven's sake, my friend, restrain your wrath!
   For what has Monfort done of wrong to you,
   Or you to him, bating one foolish quarrel,
   Which you confess from slight occasion rose,
   That in your breasts such dark resentment dwells,
   So fix'd, so hopeless?

Rez.
   O! from our youth he has distinguish'd me
   With ev'ry mark of hatred and disgust.
   For e'en in boyish sports I still oppos'd
   His proud pretensions to pre-eminence;
   Nor would I to his ripen'd greatness give
   That fulsome adulation of applause
   A senseless crowd bestow'd. Though poor in fortune,
   I still would smile at vain assuming wealth:
   But when unlook'd-for fate on me bestow'd
   Riches and splendour equal to his own,
   Though I, in truth, despise such poor distinction,
   Feeling inclin'd to be at peace with him,
   And with all men beside, I curb'd my spirit,
   And sought to soothe him. Then, with spiteful rage,
   From small offence he rear'd a quarrel with me,
   And dar'd me to the field. The rest you know.
   In short, I still have been th' opposing rock,
   O'er which the stream of his o'erflowing pride
   Hath foam'd and fretted. Seest thou how it is?

Freb.
   Too well I see, and warn thee to beware.
   Such streams have oft, by swelling floods surcharg'd,
   Borne down, with sudden and impetuous force,
   The yet unshaken stone of opposition,
   Which had for ages stopp'd their flowing course.
   I pray thee, friend, beware.

Rez.
   Thou canst not mean—he will not murder me?

Freb.
   What a proud heart, with such dark passion toss'd,
   May, in the anguish of its thoughts, conceive,
   I will not dare to say.

Rez.
                                            Ha, ha! thou knowst him not.
   Full often have I mark'd it in his youth,
   And could have almost lov'd him for the weakness:
   He's form'd with such antipathy, by nature,
   To all infliction of corporeal pain,
   To wounding life, e'en to the sight of blood,
   He cannot if he would.

Freb.
                                            Then fie upon thee!
   It is not gen'rous to provoke him thus.
   But let us part: we'll talk of this again.
   Something approaches.—We are here too long.

Rez.
   Well, then, to-morrow I'll attend your call.
   Here lies my way. Good night.


 Exit .

Enter Conrad .
Con.
   Forgive, I pray, my lord, a stranger's boldness.
   I have presum'd to wait your leisure here,
   Though at so late an hour.

Freb.
                                            But who art thou?

Con.
   My name is Conrad, sir,
   A humble suitor to your honour's goodness,
   Who is the more embolden'd to presume,
   In that De Monfort's brave and noble marquis
   Is so much fam'd for good and gen'rous deeds.

Freb.
   You are mistaken, I am not the man.

Con.
   Then, pardon me: I thought I could not err;
   That mien so dignified, that piercing eye
   Assur'd me it was he.



 
Freb.
   My name is not De Monfort, courteous stranger;
   But, if you have a favour to request,
   I may, with him, perhaps, befriend your suit.

Con.
   I thank your honour, but I have a friend
   Who will commend me to De Monfort's favour:
   The Marquis Rezenvelt has known me long,
   Who, says report, will soon become his brother.

Freb.
   If thou wouldst seek thy ruin from De Monfort,
   The name of Rezenvelt employ, and prosper;
   But, if aught good, use any name but his.

Con.
   How may this be?

Freb.
                                            I cannot now explain.
   Early to-morrow call upon Count Freberg;
   So am I call'd, each burgher knows my house,
   And there instruct me how to do you service.
   Good night.


 Exit .
Con.

 alone .
   Well, this mistake may be of service to me:
   And yet my bus'ness I will not unfold
   To this mild, ready, promise-making courtier;
   I've been by such too oft deceiv'd already.
   But if such violent enmity exist
   Between De Monfort and this Rezenvelt,
   He'll prove my advocate by opposition.
   For if De Monfort would reject my suit,
   Being the man whom Rezenvelt esteems,
   Being the man he hates, a cord as strong,
   Will he not favour me? I'll think of this.


 Exit .
SCENE II.
A lower apartment in Jerome's house, with a wide folding glass door, looking into a garden, where the trees and shrubs are brown and leafless. Enter De Monfort with a thoughtful frowning aspect, and paces slowly across the stage , Jerome following behind him, with a timid step . De Monfort hearing him, turns suddenly about .
De Mon.

 angrily .
   Who follows me to this sequester'd room?

Jer.
   I have presum'd, my lord. 'Tis somewhat late:
   I am inform'd you eat at home to-night;
   Here is a list of all the dainty fare
   My busy search has found; please to peruse it.

De Mon.
   Leave me: begone! Put hemlock in thy soup,
   Or deadly night-shade, or rank hellebore,
   And I will mess upon it.

Jer.
                                            Heaven forbid!
   Your honour's life is all too precious, sure.

De Mon.

 sternly .
   Did I not say begone?

Jer.
   Pardon, my lord, I'm old, and oft forget.


 Exit .
De Mon.

 looking after him, as if his heart smote him .
   Why will they thus mistime their foolish zeal,
   That I must be so stern?
   O, that I were upon some desert coast!
   Where howling tempests and the lashing tide
   Would stun me into deep and senseless quiet;
   As the storm-beaten trav'ller droops his head,
   In heavy, dull, lethargic weariness,
   And, 'mid the roar of jarring elements,
   Sleeps to awake no more.
   What am I grown? all things are hateful to me.
Enter Manuel .

 Stamping with his foot .

   Who bids thee break upon my privacy?

Man.
   Nay, good my lord! I heard you speak aloud,
   And dreamt not surely that you were alone.

De Mon.
   What, dost thou watch, and pin thine ears to holes,
   To catch those exclamations of the soul,
   Which heaven alone should hear? Who hir'd thee, pray?
   Who basely hir'd thee for a task like this?

Man.
   My lord, I cannot hold. For fifteen years,
   Long-troubled years, I have your servant been,
   Nor hath the proudest lord in all the realm,
   With firmer, with more honourable faith
   His sov'reign serv'd, than I have served you;
   But if my honesty be doubted now,
   Let him who is more faithful take my place,
   And serve you better.

De Mon.
   Well, be it as thou wilt. Away with thee!
   Thy loud-mouth'd boasting is no rule for me
   To judge thy merit by.


Enter Jerome hastily, and pulls Manuel away .
Jer.
   Come, Manuel, come away; thou art not wise.
   The stranger must depart and come again,
   For now his honour will not be disturb'd.


 Exit Manuel sulkily .
De Mon.
   A stranger, saidst thou?


 Drops his handkerchief .
Jer.
   I did, good sir, but he shall go away;
   You shall not be disturb'd.

 Stooping to lift the handkerchief .
                                            You have dropp'd somewhat.

De Mon.

 preventing him .
   Nay, do not stoop, my friend, I pray thee not!
   Thou art too old to stoop.
   I'm much indebted to thee.—Take this ring—
   I love thee better than I seem to do.
   I pray thee do it—thank me not.—What stranger?

Jer.
   A man who does most earnestly intreat
   To see your honour; but I know him not.

De Mon.
   Then let him enter.


 Exit Jerome .

A pause. Enter Conrad .
De Mon.
   You are the stranger who would speak with me?



 
Con.
   I am so far unfortunate, my lord.
   That, though my fortune on your favour hangs,
   I am to you a stranger.

De Mon.
   How may this be? what can I do for you?,

Con.
   Since thus your lordship does so frankly ask
   The tiresome preface of apology
   I will forbear, and tell my tale at once,
   In plodding drudgery I've spent my youth,
   A careful penman in another's office;
   And now, my master and employer dead,
   They seek to set a stripling o'er my head,
   And leave me on to drudge, e'en to old age,
   Because I have no friend to take my part.
   It is an office in your native town,
   For I am come from thence, and I am told
   You can procure it for me. Thus, my lord,
   From the repute of goodness which you bear,
   I have presum'd to beg.

De Mon.
   They have befool'd thee with a false report.

Con.
   Alas! I see it is in vain to plead,
   Your mind is prepossess'd against a wretch,
   Who has, unfortunately for his weal,
   Offended the revengeful Rezenvelt.

De Mon.
   What dost thou say?

Con.
   What I, perhaps, had better leave unsaid.
   Who will believe my wrongs if I complain?
   I am a stranger, Rezenvelt my foe,
   Who will believe my wrongs?

De Mon.

 eagerly catching him by the coat .
                                            I will believe them!
   Though they were base as basest, vilest deeds,
   In ancient record told, I would believe them!
   Let not the smallest atom of unworthiness
   That he has put upon thee be conceal'd.
   Speak boldly, tell it all; for, by the light!
   I'll be thy friend, I'll be thy warmest friend,
   If he has done thee wrong.

Con.
   Nay, pardon me, it were not well advis'd,
   If I should speak so freely of the man
   Who will so soon your nearest kinsman be.

De Mon.
   What canst thou mean by this?

Con.
                                            That Marquis Rezenvelt
   Has pledg'd his faith unto your noble sister,
   And soon will be the husband of her choice.
   So I am told, and so the world believes.

De Mon.
   'Tis false! 'tis basely false!
   What wretch could drop from his envenom'd tongue
   A tale so damn'd?—It chokes my breath—

 Stamping with his foot .
   What wretch did tell it thee?

Con.
   Nay, every one with whom I have convers'd
   Has held the same discourse. I judge it not.
   But you, my lord, who with the lady dwell.
   You best can tell what her deportment speaks;
   Whether her conduct and unguarded words
   Belie such rumour.


 De Monfort pauses, staggers backwards, and sinks into a chair; then starting up hastily .
De Mon.
   Where am I now? 'midst all the cursed thoughts,
   That on my soul like stinging scorpions prey'd,
   This never came before—Oh, if it be!
   The thought will drive me mad.—Was it for this
   She urg'd her warm request on bended knee?
   Alas! I wept, and thought of sister's love,
   No damned love like this.
   Fell devil! 'tis hell itself has lent thee aid
   To work such sorcery!
 Pauses .
I'll not believe it.
   I must have proof clear as the noon-day sun
   For such foul charge as this! Who waits without?


 Paces up and down, furiously agitated .
Con.

 aside .
   What have I done? I've carried this too far.
   I've rous'd a fierce ungovernable madman.


Enter Jerome .
De Mon.

 in a loud angry voice .
   Where did she go, at such an early hour,
   And with such slight attendance?

Jer.
   Of whom inquires your honour?

De Mon.
   Why, of your lady. Said I not my sister?

Jer.
   The Lady Jane, your sister?

De Mon.

 in a faltering voice .
   Yes, I did call her so.

Jer.
   In truth, I cannot tell you where she went.
   E'en now, from the short beechen walk hard-by,
   I saw her through the garden-gate return.
   The Marquis Rezenvelt, and Freberg's countess,
   Are in her company. This way they come,
   As being nearer to the back apartments;
   But I shall stop them, if it be your will,
   And bid them enter here.

De Mon.
   No, stop them not. I will remain unseen,
   And mark them as they pass. Draw back a little.


 Conrad seems alarmed, and steals off unnoticed . De Monfort grasps Jerome tightly by the hand, and drawing back with him two or three steps, not to be seen from the garden, waits in silence, with his eyes fixed on the glass door .
De Mon.
   I hear their footsteps on the grating sand:
   How like the croaking of a carrion bird,
   That hateful voice sounds to the distant ear!
   And now she speaks—her voice sounds cheerly too—
   Curs'd be their mirth!—
   Now, now, they come; keep closer still! keep steady!


 Taking hold of Jerome with both hands .
Jer.
   My lord, you tremble much.

De Mon.
                                            What, do I shake?

Jer.
   You do, in truth, and your teeth chatter too.

De Mon.
   See! see they come! he strutting by her side.

 Jane, Rezenvelt , and Countess Freberg appear through the glass door, pursuing their way up a short walk leading to the other wing of the house .


 
   See, his audacious face he turns to hers;
   Utt'ring with confidence some nauseous jest.
   And she endures it too—Oh! this looks vilely!
   Ha! mark that courteous motion of his arm!—
   What does he mean?—he dares not take her hand!

 Pauses and looks eagerly .
   By heaven and hell he does!


 Letting go his hold of Jerome , he throws out his hands vehemently, and thereby pushes him against the scene .
Jer.
   Oh! I am stunn'd! my head is crack'd in twain:
   Your honour does forget how old I am.

De Mon.
   Well, well, the wall is harder than I wist.
   Begone, and whine within.
 Exit Jerome , with a sad rueful countenance .

 De Monfort comes forward to the front of the stage, and makes a long pause expressive of great agony of mind .

   It must be so: each passing circumstance;
   Her hasty journey here; her keen distress
   Whene'er my soul's abhorrence I express'd;
   Ay, and that damned reconciliation,
   With tears extorted from me: Oh, too well!
   All, all too well bespeak the shameful tale.
   I should have thought of heaven and hell conjoin'd,
   The morning star mix'd with infernal fire,
   Ere I had thought of this—
   Hell's blackest magic, in the midnight hour,
   With horrid spells and incantation dire,
   Such combination opposite unseemly,
   Of fair and loathsome, excellent and base,
   Did ne'er produce—But every thing is possible,
   So as it may my misery enhance!
   Oh! I did love her with such pride of soul!
   When other men, in gay pursuit of love,
   Each beauty follow'd, by her side I stay'd;
   Far prouder of a brother's station there,
   Than all the favours favour'd lovers boast.
   We quarrell'd once, and when I could no more
   The alter'd coldness of her eye endure,
   I slipp'd o'tip-toe to her chamber-door;
   And when she ask'd who gently knock'd—Oh! oh!
   Who could have thought of this?

 Throws himself into a chair, covers his face with his hand, and bursts into tears. After some time, he starts up from his seat furiously .
   Hell's direst torment seize the infernal villain!
   Detested of my soul! I will have vengeance!
   I'll crush thy swelling pride—I'll still thy vaunting—
   I'll do a deed of blood!—Why shrink I thus?
   If by some spell or magic sympathy,
   Piercing the lifeless figure on that wall
   Could pierce his bosom too, would I not cast it?

 Throwing a dagger against the wall .
   Shall groans and blood affright me? No, I'll do it.
   Though gasping life beneath my pressure heav'd,
   And my soul shudder'd at the horrid brink,
   I would not flinch.—Fie, this recoiling nature!
   O that his sever'd limbs were strew'd in air,
   So as I saw it not!
Enter Rezenvelt behind from the glass door . De Monfort turns round, and on seeing him, starts back, then drawing his sword, rushes furiously upon him .

   Detested robber! now all forms are over;
   Now open villainy, now open hate!
   Defend thy life!

Rez.
                                            De Monfort, thou art mad.

De Mon.
   Speak not, but draw. Now for thy hated life!

 They fight : Rezenvelt parries his thrusts with great skill, and at last disarms him .
   Then take my life, black fiend, for hell assists thee.

Rez.
   No, Monfort, but I'll take away your sword,
   Not as a mark of disrespect to you,
   But for your safety. By to-morrow's eve
   I'll call on you myself and give it back;
   And then, if I am charg'd with any wrong,
   I'll justify myself. Farewell, strange man!


 Exit .

 De Monfort stands for some time quite motionless, like one stupified. Enters to him a servant: he starts .
De Mon.
   Ha! who art thou?

Ser.
                                            'Tis I, an' please your honour.

De Mon.

 staring wildly at him .
   who art thou?

Ser.
   Your servant Jacques.

De Mon.
                                            Indeed I knew thee not.
   Now leave me, and when Rezenvelt is gone,
   Return and let me know.

Ser.
                                            He's gone already.

De Mon.
   How! is he gone so soon?

Ser.
                                            His servant told me,
   He was in haste to go; as night comes on,
   And at the evening hour he purposes
   To visit some old friend, whose lonely mansion
   Stands a short mile beyond the farther wood,
   In which a convent is of holy nuns,
   Who chaunt this night a requiem to the soul
   Of a departed sister. For so well
   He loves such solemn music, he has order'd
   His horses onward by the usual road,
   Meaning on foot to cross the wood alone.
   So says his knave. Good may it do him, sooth!
   I would not walk through those wild dells alone
   For all his wealth. For there, as I have heard,
   Foul murders have been done, and ravens scream;
   And things unearthly, stalking through the night,
   Have scar'd the lonely trav'ller from his wits.

 De Monfort stands fixed in thought .
   I've ta'en your steed, an' please you, from the field,
   And wait your farther orders.

 De Monfort heeds him not .


 
   His hoofs are sound, and where the saddle gall'd,
   Begins to mend. What further must be done?

 De Monfort still heeds him not .
   His honour heeds me not. Why should I stay?

De Mon.

 eagerly, as he is going .
   He goes alone, saidst thou?

Ser.
   His servant told me so.

De Mon.
                                            And at what hour?

Ser.
   He 'parts from Amberg by the fall of eve.
   Save you, my lord! how chang'd your count'nance is!
   Are you not well?

De Mon.
                                            Yes, I am well: begone,
   And wait my orders by the city wall:
   I'll wend that way, and speak to thee again.


 Exit servant .

 De Monfort walks rapidly two or three times across the stage; then seizes his dagger from the wall, looks steadfastly at its point, and exit hastily .
SCENE III.
Moonlight. A wild path in a wood, shaded with trees. Enter De Monfort , with a strong expression of disquiet, mixed with fear, upon his face, looking behind him, and bending his ear to the ground, as if he listened to something .
De Mon.
   How hollow groans the earth beneath my tread!
   Is there an echo here? Methinks it sounds
   As though some heavy footstep follow'd me.
   I will advance no farther.
   Deep settled shadows rest across the path,
   And thickly-tangled boughs o'erhang this spot.
   O that a tenfold gloom did cover it,
   That'mid the murky darkness I might strike!
   As in the wild confusion of a dream,
   Things horrid, bloody, terrible do pass,
   As though they pass'd not; nor impress the mind
   With the fix'd clearness of reality.
 An owl is heard screaming near him .

 Starting .

   What sound is that?

 Listens, and the owl cries again .
   It is the screech-owl's cry.
   Foul bird of night! what spirit guides thee here?
   Art thou instinctive drawn to scenes of horror?
   I've heard of this.

 Pauses and listens .
   How those fall'n leaves so rustle on the path,
   With whisp'ring noise, as though the earth around me
   Did utter secret things.
   The distant river, too, bears to mine ear
   A dismal wailing. O mysterious night!
   Thou art not silent; many tongues hast thou.
   A distant gath'ring blast sounds through the wood,
   And dark clouds fleetly hasten o'er the sky:
   O! that a storm would rise, a raging storm;
   Amidst the roar of warring elements
   I'd lift my hand and strike! but this pale light,
   The calm distinctness of each stilly thing,
   Is terrible
 starting .
Footsteps, and near me too!
   He comes! he comes! I'll watch him farther on—
   I cannot do it here.


 Exit .

Enter Rezenvelt , and continues his way slowly from the bottom of the stage: as he advances to the front, the owl screams, he stops and listens, and the owl screams again .
Rez.
   Ha! does the night-bird greet me on my way?
   How much his hooting is in harmony
   With such a scene as this! I like it well.
   Oft when a boy, at the still twilight hour,
   I've leant my back against some knotted oak,
   And loudly mimick'd him, till to my call
   He answer would return, and, through the gloom,
   We friendly converse held.
   Between me and the star-bespangled sky,
   Those aged oaks their crossing branches wave,
   And through them looks the pale and placid moon.
   How like a crocodile, or winged snake,
   Yon sailing cloud bears on its dusky length!
   And now transformed by the passing wind,
   Methinks it seems a flying Pegasus.
   Ay, but a shapeless band of blacker hue
   Comes swiftly after.—
   A hollow murm'ring wind sounds through the trees;
   I hear it from afar; this bodes a storm.
   I must not linger here—

 A bell heard at some distance .
                                            The convent bell.
   'Tis distant still: it tells their hour of prayer.
   It sends a solemn sound upon the breeze,
   That, to a fearful superstitious mind,
   In such a scene, would like a death-knell come.


 Exit .
ACT V. SCENE I.
The inside of a convent chapel, of old Gothic architecture, almost dark: two torches only are seen at a distance, burning over a newly covered  grave. Lightning is seen flashing through the windows, and thunder heard, with the sound of wind beating upon the building. Enter two monks.
st monk.
   The storm increases: hark how dismally
   It howls along the cloisters. How goes time?

nd monk.
   It is the hour: I hear them near at hand:
   And when the solemn requiem has been sung


 
   For the departed sister, we'll retire.
   Yet, should this tempest still more violent grow,
   We'll beg a friendly shelter till the morn.

st monk.
   See, the procession enters: let us join.


 The organ strikes up a solemn prelude. Enter a procession of nuns, with the abbess, bearing torches. After compassing the grave twice, and remaining there some time, the organ plays a grand dirge, while they stand round the grave .
SONG BY THE NUNS.    Departed soul, whose poor remains
   This hallow'd lowly grave contains;
   Whose passing storm of life is o'er,
   Whose pains and sorrows are no more;
   Bless'd be thou with the bless'd above,
   Where all is joy, and purity, and love!

   Let Him , in might and mercy dread,
   Lord of the living and the dead;
   In whom the stars of heav'n rejoice,
   And the ocean lifts its voice;
   Thy spirit, purified, to glory raise,
   To sing witn holy saints his everlasting praise!

   Departed soul, who in this earthly scene
   Hast our lowly sister been,
   Swift be thy way to where the blessed dwell!
   Until we meet thee there, farewell! farewell!


Enter a young pensioner, with a wild terrified look, her hair and dress all scattered, and rushes forward amongst them .
Abb.
   Why com'st thou here, with such disorder'd looks,
   To break upon our sad solemnity?

Pen.
   Oh! I did hear through the receding blast,
   Such horrid cries! they made my blood run chill.

Abb.
   'Tis but the varied voices of the storm,
   Which many times will sound like distant screams:
   It has deceiv'd thee.

Pen.
   O no, for twice it call'd, so loudly call'd,
   With horrid strength, beyond the pitch of nature;
   And murder! murder! was the dreadful cry.
   A third time it return'd with feeble strength,
   But o' the sudden ceas'd, as though the words
   Were smother'd rudely in the grappled throat,
   And all was still again, save the wild blast
   Which at a distance growl'd.—
   Oh! it will never from my mind depart!
   That dreadful cry, all i' the instant still'd:
   For then, so near, some horrid deed was done,
   And none to rescue.

Abb.
   Where didst thou hear it?

Pen.
                                            In the higher cells,
   As now a window, open'd by the storm,
   I did attempt to close.

st monk.
   I wish our brother Bernard were arriv'd;
   He is upon his way.

Abb.
   Be not alarm'd; it still may be deception.
   'Tis meet we finish our solemnity,
   Nor show neglect unto the honour'd dead.


 Gives a sign, and the organ plays again: just as it ceases, a loud knocking is heard without .
Abb.
   Ha! who may this be? hush!


 Knocking heard again .
d monk.
   It is the knock of one in furious haste.
   Hush! hush! What footsteps come? Ha! brother Bernard.


Enter Bernard bearing a lantern .
st monk.
   See, what a look he wears of stiffen'd fear!
   Where hast thou been, good brother?

Bern.
   I've seen a horrid sight!

 All gathering round him and speaking at once .
                                            What hast thou seen?

Bern.
   As on I hasten'd, bearing thus my light,
   Across the path, not fifty paces off,
   I saw a murder'd corse, stretch'd on his back,
   Smear'd with new blood, as though but freshly slain.

Abb.
   A man or woman was't?

Bern.
                                            A man, a man!

Abb.
   Didst thou examine if within its breast
   There yet were lodg'd some small remains of life?
   Was it quite dead?

Bern.
                                            Nought in the grave is deader.
   I look'd but once, yet life did never lodge
   In any form so laid.
   A chilly horror seiz'd me, and I fled.

st monk.
   And does the face seem all unknown to thee?

Bern.
   The face! I would not on the face have look'd
   For e'en a kingdom's wealth, for all the world!
   O no! the bloody neck, the bloody neck!


 Shaking his head and shuddering with horror. Loud knocking heard without .
Sist.
   Good mercy! who comes next?

Bern.
                                            Not far behind
   I left our brother Thomas on the road;
   But then he did repent him as he went,
   And threatened to return.

d monk.
                                            See, here he comes.


Enter Brother Thomas , with a wild terrified look .
st monk.
   How wild he looks!

Bern.

 going up to him eagerly .
   What, hast thou seen it too?

Thom.
   Yes, yes! it glared upon me as it pass'd.

Bern.
   What glared upon thee?

 All gathering round Thomas , and speaking at once .
                                            O! what hast thou seen?

Thom.
   As striving with the blast I onward came,
   Turning my feeble lantern from the wind,
   Its light upon a dreadful visage gleam'd,


 
   Which paus'd and look'd upon me as it pass'd;
   But such a look, such wildness of despair,
   Such horror-strained features, never yet
   Did earthly visage show. I shrank and shudder'd.
   If a damn'd spirit may to earth return,
   I've seen it.

Bern.
                                            Was there any blood upon it?

Thom.
   Nay, as it pass'd, I did not see its form;
   Nought but the horrid face.

Bern.
   It is the murderer.

st monk.
                                            What way went it?

Thom.
   I durst not look till I had pass'd it far.
   Then turning round, upon the rising bank,
   I saw, between me and the paly sky,
   A dusky form, tossing and agitated.
   I stopp'd to mark it; but, in truth, I found
   'Twas but a sapling bending to the wind,
   And so I onward hied, and look'd no more.

st monk.
   But we must look to't; we must follow it:
   Our duty so commands.
 To d monk .
Will you go, brother?

 To Bernard .
   And you, good Bernard?

Bern.
                                            If I needs must go.

st monk.
   Come, we must all go.

Abb.
                                            Heaven be with you, then!


 Exeunt monks .
Pen.
   Amen! amen! Good heav'n, be with us all!
   O what a dreadful night!

Abb.
   Daughters, retire; peace to the peaceful dead!
   Our solemn ceremony now is finish'd.


 Exeunt .
SCENE II.
A large room in the convent, very dark. Enter the abbess, young pensioner bearing a light, and several nuns; she sets down the light on a table at the bottom of the stage, so that the room is still very gloomy .
Abb.
   They have been longer absent than I thought:
   I fear he has escap'd them.

st nun.
                                            Heaven forbid!

Pen.
   No, no, found out foul murder ever is,
   And the foul murderer too.

d nun.
   The good Saint Francis will direct their search;
   The blood so near this holy convent shed
   For threefold vengeance calls.

Abb.
   I hear a noise within the inner court—
   They are return'd
 listening ;
and Bernard's voice I hear:
   They are return'd.

Pen.
                                            Why do I tremble so?
   It is not I who ought to tremble thus.

d nun.
   I hear them at the door.

Bern.

 without .
   Open the door, I pray thee, brother Thomas;
   I cannot now unhand the prisoner.

 All speak together, shrinking back from the door, and staring upon one another .
                                            He is with them!
 A folding door at the bottom of the stage is opened, and enter Bernard, Thomas , and the other two monks, carrying lanterns in their hands, and bringing in De Monfort . They are likewise followed by other monks. As they lead forward De Monfort , the light is turned away, so that he is seen obscurely; but when they come to the front of the stage, they turn the light side of their lanterns on him at once, and his face is seen in all the strengthened horror of despair, with his hands and clothes bloody .

 Abbess and nuns speak at once, and start back .

   Holy saints be with us!

Bern.

 to abb .
   Behold the man of blood!

Abb.
   Of misery too; I cannot look upon him.

Bern.

 to nuns .
   Nay, holy sisters, turn not thus away.
   Speak to him, if, perchance, he will regard you:
   For from his mouth we have no utt'rance heard,
   Save one deep groan and smother'd exclamation,
   When first we seiz'd him.

Abb.

 to De Mon .
   Most miserable man, how art thou thus?

 Pauses .
   Thy tongue is silent, but those bloody hands
   Do witness horrid things. What is thy name?

De Mon.

 roused, looks steadfastly at the abbess for some time; then speaking in a short hurried voice .
   I have no name.

Abb.

 to Bern .
   Do it thyself; I'll speak to him no more.

Pen.
   O holy saints! that this should be the man
   Who did against his fellow lift the stroke,
   Whilst he so loudly call'd.—
   Still in my ears it rings: O murder! murder!

De Mon.

 starting .
   He calls again!

Pen.
   No, he did call, but now his voice is still'd.
   'Tis past.

De Mon.
   'Tis past.

Pen.
   Yes, it is past! art thou not he who did it?


 De Monfort utters a deep groan, and is supported from falling by the monks. A noise is heard without .
Abb.
   What noise is this of heavy lumb'ring steps,
   Like men who with a weighty burthen come?

Bern.
   It is the body: I have orders given
   That here it should be laid.


 Enter men bearing the body of Rezenvelt , covered with a white cloth, and set it down in the middle of the room: they then uncover it . De Monfort stands fixed and motionless with horror, only that a sudden shivering seems to pass over him when they uncover the corpse.

 
The abbess and nuns shrink back and retire to some distance, all the rest fixing their eyes steadfastly upon De Monfort . A long pause .
Bern.

 to De Mon .
   Seest thou the lifeless corpse, those bloody wounds?
   See how he lies, who but so shortly since
   A living creature was, with all the powers
   Of sense, and motion, and humanity!
   Oh! what a heart had he who did this deed!

st monk

 looking at the body .
   How hard those teeth against the lips are press'd,
   As though he struggled still!

nd monk.
   The hands too, clench'd: nature's last fearful effort.


 De Monfort still stands motionless. Brother Thomas then goes to the body, and raising up the head a little, turns it towards De Monfort .
Thom.
   Knowst thou this ghastly face?

De Mon.

 putting his hands before his face in violent perturbation .
   Oh, do not! do not! Veil it from my sight!
   Put me to any agony but this!

Thom.
   Ha! dost thou then confess the dreadful deed?
   Hast thou against the laws of awful heaven
   Such horrid murder done? What fiend could tempt thee?


 Pauses, and looks steadfastly at De Monfort .
De Mon.
   I hear thy words, but do not hear their sense—
   Hast thou not cover'd it?

Bern.

 to Thom .
   Forbear, my brother, for thou seest right well
   He is not in a state to answer thee.
   Let us retire and leave him for awhile.
   These windows are with iron grated o'er;
   He is secur'd, and other duty calls.

Thom.
   Then let it be.

Bern.

 to monks , &c.
   Come, let us all depart.


 Exeunt abbess and nuns, followed by the monks, one monk lingering a little behind .
De Mon.
   All gone!

 Perceiving the monk .
                                            O stay thou here!

Monk.
                                            It must not be.

De Mon.
   I'll give thee gold; I'll make thee rich in gold,
   If thou wilt stay e'en but a little while.

Monk.
   I must not, must not, stay.

De Mon.
                                            I do conjure thee!

Monk.
   I dare not stay with thee.


 Going .
De Mon.
                                            And wilt thou go?

 Catching hold of him eagerly .
   O! throw thy cloak upon this grizly form!
   The unclos'd eyes do stare upon me still.
   O do not leave me thus!


 Monk covers the body, and exit.
De Mon.

 alone, looking at the covered body, but at a distance .
   Alone with thee! but thou art nothing now.
   'Tis done, 'tis number'd with the things o'erpast;
   Would! would it were to come!—
   What fated end, what darkly gathering cloud
   Will close on all this horror?
   O that dire madness would unloose my thoughts,
   And fill my mind with wildest fantasies,
   Dark, restless, terrible! aught, aught but this!

 Pauses and shudders .
   How with convulsive life he heav'd beneath me,
   E'en with the death's wound gor'd! O horrid, horrid!
   Methinks I feel him still.—What sound is that?
   I heard a smother'd groan.—It is impossible!

 Looking steadfastly at the body .
   It moves! it moves! the cloth doth heave and swell.
   It moves again! I cannot suffer this—
   Whate'er it be, I will uncover it.

 Runs to the corpse, and tears off the cloth in despair .
   All still beneath.
   Nought is there here but fix'd and grizly death,
   How sternly fixed! Oh! those glazed eyes!
   They look upon me still.

 Shrinks back with horror .
   Come, madness! come unto me, senseless death!
   I cannot suffer this! Here, rocky wall,
   Seatter these brains, or dull them!


 Runs furiously, and dashing his head against the wall, falls upon the floor .

Enter two monks hastily.
st monk.
   See: wretched man, he hath destroy'd himself.

d monk.
   He does but faint. Let us remove him hence.

st monk.
   We did not well to leave him here alone.

d monk.
   Come, let us bear him to the open air.


 Exeunt, bearing out De Monfort .
SCENE III.
Before the gates of the convent. Enter Jane De Monfort, Freberg , and Manuel . As they are proceeding towards the gate , Jane stops short and shrinks back .
Freb.
   Ha! wherefore? has a sudden illness seiz'd thee?

Jane.
   No, no, my friend.—And yet I am very faint—
   I dread to enter here.

Man.
                                            Ay, so I thought:
   For, when between the trees, that abbey tower
   First show'd its top, I saw your count'nance change.
   But breathe a little here: I'll go before,
   And make inquiry at the nearest gate.



 
Freb.
   Do so, good Manuel.

 Manuel goes and knocks at the gate .
   Courage, dear madam: all may yet be well.
   Rezenvelt's servant, frighten'd with the storm,
   And seeing that his master join'd him not,
   As by appointment, at the forest's edge,
   Might be alarm'd, and give too ready ear
   To an unfounded rumour.
   He saw it not; he came not here himself.

Jane

 looking eagerly to the gate, where Manuel talks with the porter .
   Ha! see, he talks with some one earnestly.
   And seest thou not that motion of his hands?
   He stands like one who hears a horrid tale.
   Almighty God!

 Manuel goes into the convent .
                                            He comes not back; he enters.

Freb.
   Bear up, my noble friend.

Jane.
   I will, I will! But this suspense is dreadful.

 A long pause . Manuel re-enters from the convent, and comes forward slowly with a sad countenance .
   Is this the face of one who bears good tidings?
   O God! his face doth tell the horrid fact:
   There is nought doubtful here.

Freb.
                                            How is it, Manuel?

Man.
   I've seen him through a crevice in his door:
   It is indeed my master.


 Bursting into tears .

 Jane faints, and is supported by Freberg .— Enter abbess and several nuns from the convent, who gather about her, and apply remedies. She recovers .
st nun.
   The life returns again.

d nun.
                                            Yes, she revives.

Abb.

 to Freb .
   Let me entreat this noble lady's leave
   To lead her in. She seems in great distress:
   We would with holy kindness soothe her woe,
   And do by her the deeds of christian love.

Freb.
   Madam, your goodness has my grateful thanks.


 Exeunt, supporting Jane into the convent .
SCENE IV.
De Monfort is discovered sitting in a thoughtful posture. He remains so for some time. His face afterwards begins to appear agitated, like one whose mind is harrowed with the severest thoughts; then, starting from his seat, he clasps his hands together, and holds them up to heaven .
De Mon.
   O that I ne'er had known the light of day!
   That filmy darkness on mine eyes had hung,
   And clos'd me out from the fair face of nature!
   O that my mind in mental darkness pent,
   Had no perception, no distinction known,
   Of fair or foul, perfection or defect,
   Nor thought conceiv'd of proud pre-eminence!
   O that it had! O that I had been form'd
   An idiot from the birth! a senseless changeling,
   Who eats his glutton's meal with greedy haste,
   Nor knows the hand which feeds him.—

 Pauses; then in a calmer sorrowful voice .
   What am I now? how ends the day of life?
   For end it must; and terrible this gloom,
   This storm of horrors that surrounds its close.
   This little term of nature's agony
   Will soon be o'er, and what is past is past;
   But shall I then, on the dark lap of earth
   Lay me to rest, in still unconsciousness,
   Like senseless clod that doth no pressure feel
   From wearing foot of daily passenger;
   Like a steep'd rock o'er which the breaking waves
   Bellow and foam unheard? O would I could!


Enter Manuel , who springs forward to his master, but is checked upon perceiving De Monfort draw back and look sternly at him .
Man.
   My lord, my master! O my dearest master!

 De Monfort still looks at him without speaking .
   Nay, do not thus regard me, good my lord!
   Speak to me: am I not your faithful Manuel?

De Mon.

 in a hasty broken voice .
   Art thou alone?

Man.
   No, sir, the Lady Jane is on her way;
   She is not far behind.

De Mon.

 tossing his arm over his head in an agony .
   This is too much! all I can bear but this!
   It must not be.—Run and prevent her coming.
   Say, he who is detain'd a prisoner here
   Is one to her unknown. I now am nothing.
   I am a man of holy claims bereft;
   Out of the pale of social kindred cast;
   Nameless and horrible.—
   Tell her De Monfort far from hence is gone
   Into a desolate and distant land,
   Ne'er to return again. Fly, tell her this;
   For we must meet no more.


Enter Jane De Monfort , bursting into the chamber and followed by Freberg , abbess, and several nuns .
Jane.
   We must! we must! My brother, O my brother!

 De Monfort turns away his head and hides his face with his arm . Jane stops short, and, making a great effort, turns to Freberg , and the others who followed her, and with an air of dignity stretches out her hand, beckoning them to retire. All retire but Freberg , who seems to hesitate .
   And thou too, Freberg: call it not unkind.


 Exit Freberg: Jane and De Monfort only remain.


 
Jane.
   My hapless Monfort!


 De Monfort turns round and looks sorrowfully upon her; she opens her arms to him, and he, rushing into them, hides his face upon her breast, and weeps .
Jane.
   Ay, give thy sorrow vent; here mayst thou weep.

De Mon.
  

 in broken accents .
   Oh! this, my sister, makes me feel again
   The kindness of affection.
   My mind has in a dreadful storm been tost;
   Horrid and dark—I thought to weep no more—
   I've done a deed—But I am human still.

Jane.
   I know thy suff'rings: leave thy sorrow free!
   Thou art with one who never did upbraid;
   Who mourns, who loves thee still.

De Mon.
   Ah! sayst thou so? no, no; it should not be.

 Shrinking from her .
   I am a foul and bloody murderer,
   For such embrace unmeet: O leave me! leave me!
   Disgrace and public shame abide me now;
   And all, alas! who do my kindred own,
   The direful portion share.—Away, away!
   Shall a disgrac'd and public criminal
   Degrade thy name, and claim affinity
   To noble worth like thine?—I have no name—
   I'm nothing now, not e'en to thee: depart.


 She takes his hand, and grasping it firmly, speaks with a determined voice .
Jane.
   De Monfort, hand in hand we have enjoy'd
   The playful term of infancy together;
   And in the rougher path of ripen'd years
   We've been each other's stay. Dark low'rs our fate,
   And terrible the storm that gathers o'er us;
   But nothing, till that latest agony
   Which severs thee from nature, shall unloose
   This fix'd and sacred hold. In thy dark prison-house;
   In the terrific face of armed law;
   Yea, on the seaffold, if it needs must be,
   I never will forsake thee.

De Mon.

 looking at her with admiration .
   Heav'n bless thy gen'ro us soul, my noble Jane!
   I thought to sink beneath this load of ill,
   Depress'd with infamy and open shame;
   I thought to sink in abject wretchedness:
   But for thy sake I'll rouse my manhood up,
   And meet it bravely; no unseemly weakness,
   I feel my rising strength, shall blot my end,
   To clothe thy cheek with shame.

Jane.
   Yes, thou art noble still.

De Mon.
   With thee I am; who were not so with thee?
   But, ah! my sister, short will be the term:
   Death's stroke will come, and in that state beyond,
   Where things unutterable wait the soul,
   New from its earthly tenement discharg'd,
   We shall be sever'd far.
   Far as the spotless purity of virtue
   Is from the murd'rer's guilt, far shall we be.
   This is the gulf of dread uncertainty
   From which the soul recoils.

Jane.
   The God who made thee is a God of mercy:
   Think upon this.

De Mon.

 shaking his head .
   No, no! this blood! this blood!

Jane.
   Yes, e'en the sin of blood may be forgiv'n,
   When humble penitence hath once aton'd.

De Mon.

 eagerly .
   What, after terms of lengthen'd misery,
   Imprison'd anguish of tormented spirits,
   Shall I again, a renovated soul,
   Into the blessed family of the good
   Admittance have? Thinkst thou that this may be?
   Speak, if thou canst: O speak me comfort here!
   For dreadful fancies, like an armed host,
   Have push'd me to despair. It is most horrible—
   O speak of hope! if any hope there be.


 Jane is silent, and looks sorrowfully upon him; then clasping her hands, and turning her eyes to heaven, seems to mutter a prayer .
De Mon.
   Ha! dost thou pray for me? heav'n hear thy prayer!
   I fain would kneel.—Alas! I dare not do it.

Jane.
   Not so! all by th' Almighty Father form'd,
   May in their deepest misery call on Him.
   Come kneel with me, my brother.


 She kneels and prays to herself; he kneels by her, and clasps his hands fervently, but speaks not. A noise of chains clanking is heard without, and they both rise .
De Mon.
   Hearest thou that noise? They come to interrupt us.

Jane.

 moving towards a side door .
   Then let us enter here.

De Mon.

 catching hold of her with a look of horror .
   Not there—not there—the corpse —the bloody corpse!

Jane.
   What, lies he there?—Unhappy Rezenvelt!

De Mon.
   A sudden thought has come across my mind;
   How came it not before? Unhappy Rezenvelt!
   Sayst thou but this?

Jane.
   What should I say? he was an honest man;
   I still have thought him such, as such lament him.

 De Monfort utters a deep groan .
   What means this heavy groan?

De Mon.
                                            It hath a meaning.



 

Enter abbess and monks, with two officers of justice carrying fetters in their hands to put upon De Monfort .
Jane

 starting .
   What men are these?

st off.
   Lady, we are the servants of the law,
   And bear with us a power, which doth constrain
   To bind with fetters this our prisoner.


 Pointing to De Monfort .
Jane.
   A stranger uncondemn'd? this cannot be.

st off.
   As yet, indeed, he is by law unjudg'd,
   But is so far condemn'd by circumstance,
   That law, or custom sacred held as law,
   Doth fully warrant us, and it must be.

Jane.
   Nay, say not so; he has no power t'escape:
   Distress hath bound him with a heavy chain;
   There is no need of yours.

st off.
   We must perform our office.

Jane.
   O! do not offer this indignity!

st off.
   Is it indignity in sacred law
   To bind a murderer?
 To d off .
Come, do thy work.

Jane.
   Harsh are thy words, and stern thy harden'd brow;
   Dark is thine eye; but all some pity have
   Unto the last extreme of misery.
   I do beseech thee! if thou art a man—


 Kneeling to him .

 De Monfort , roused at this, runs up to Jane , and raises her hastily from the ground: then stretches himself up proudly .
De Mon.

 to Jane .
   Stand thou erect in native dignity;
   And bend to none on earth the suppliant knee,
   Though cloth'd in power imperial. To my heart
   It gives a feller gripe than many irons.

 Holding out his hands .
   Here, officers of law, bind on those shackles;
   And, if they are too light, bring heavier chains,
   Add iron to iron; load, crush me to the ground:
   Nay, heap ten thousand weight upon my breast,
   For that were best of all.


 A long pause, whilst they put irons upon him. After they are on , Jane looks at him sorrowfully, and lets her head sink on her breast . De Monfort stretches out his hand, looks at them, and then at Jane ; crosses them over his breast, and endeavours to suppress his feelings . 
st off.

 to De Monfort .
   I have it, too, in charge to move you hence,
   Into another chamber more sccure.

De Mon.
   Well, I am ready, sir.

 Approaching Jane , whom the abbess is endeavouring to comfort, but to no purpose .
   Ah! wherefore thus, most honour'd and most dear?
   Shrink not at the accoutrements of ill,
   Daring the thing itself.

 Endeavouring to look cheerful .
   Wilt thou permit me with a gyved hand?

 She gives him her hand, which he raises to his lips .
   This was my proudest office.


 Exeunt , De Monfort leading out Jane .
SCENE V.
An apartment in the convent, opening into another room, whose low arched door is seen at the bottom of the stage. In one corner a monk is seen kneeling. Enter another monk, who, on perceiving him, stops till he rises from his knees, and then goes eagerly up to him .
st monk.
   How is the prisoner?

d monk

 pointing to the door .
   He is within, and the strong hand of death
   Is dealing with him.

st monk.
                                            How is this, good brother?
   Methought he brav'd it with a manly spirit;
   And led, with shackled hands, his sister forth,
   Like one resolv'd to bear misfortune bravely.

d monk.
   Yes, with heroic courage, for a while
   He seem'd inspir'd; but soon depress'd again,
   Remorse and dark despair o'erwhelm'd his soul:
   And, from the violent working of his mind,
   Some stream of life within his breast has burst;
   For many a time, within a little space,
   The ruddy tide has rush'd into his mouth.
   God grant his pains be short!

st monk.
                                            How does the lady?

d monk.
   She sits and bears his head upon her lap.
   Wiping the cold drops from his ghastly face
   With such a look of tender wretchedness,
   It wrings the heart to see her.
   How goes the night?

st monk.
   It wears, methinks, upon the midnight hour.
   It is a dark and fearful night; the moon
   Is wrapp'd in sable clouds; the chill blast sounds
   Like dismal lamentations. Ay, who knows
   What voices mix with the dark midnight winds?
   Nay, as I pass'd that yawning cavern's mouth,
   A whisp'ring sound, unearthly, reach'd my ear,
   And o'er my head a chilly coldness crept.
   Are there not wicked fiends and damned sprites,
   Whom yawning charnels, and th' unfathom'd depths
   Of secret darkness, at this fearful hour,
   Do upwards send, to watch, unseen, around
   The murd'rer's death-bed, at his fatal term,
   Ready to hail with dire and horrid welcome,
   Their future mate?—I do believe there are.



 
d monk.
   Peace, peace! a God of wisdom and of mercy,
   Veils from our sight—Ha! hear that heavy groan.


 A groan heard within .
st monk.
   It is the dying man.


 Another groan .
d monk.
   God grant him rest!

 Listening at the door .
   I hear him struggling in the gripe of death.
   O piteous heaven!
 Goes from the door .

Enter Brother Thomas from the chamber .

   How now, good brother?

Thom.
   Retire, my friends. O many a bed of death
   With all its pangs and horrors I have seen,
   But never aught like this! Retire, my friends!
   The death-bell will its awful signal give,
   When he has breath'd his last.
   I would move hence, but I am weak and faint:
   Let me a moment on thy shoulder lean.
   Oh, weak and mortal man!


 Leans on d monk: a pause .

Enter Bernard from the chamber .
d monk.

 to Bern .
   How is your penitent?

Bern.
   He is with Him who made him; Him , who knows
   The soul of man: before whose awful presence
   Th' unsceptred tyrant stands despoil'd and helpless,
   Like an unclothed babe.

 Bell tolls .
                                            The dismal sound!
   Retire, and pray for the blood-stained soul:
   May heav'n have mercy on him!
 Bell tolls again .

 Exeunt .


SCENE VI.
A hall or large room in the convent. The bodies of De Monfort and Rezenvelt are discovered laid out upon a low table or platform, covered with black . Freberg, Bernard , abbess, monks, and nuns attending .
Abb.

 to Freb .
   Here must they lie, my lord, until we know
   Respecting this the order of the law.

Freb.
   And you have wisely done, my rev'rend mother.

 Goes to the table, and looks at the bodies, but without uncovering them. .
   Unhappy men! ye, both in nature rich,
   With talents and with virtues were endued.
   Ye should have lov'd, yet deadly rancour came,
   And in the prime and manhood of your days
   Ye sleep in horrid death. O direful hate!
   What shame and wretchedness his portion is,
   Who, for a secret inmate, harbours thee!
   And who shall call him blameless, who excites,
   Ungen'rously excites, with careless scorn,
   Such baleful passion in a brother's breast,
   Whom heav'n commands to love? Low are ye laid:
   Still all contention now.—Low are ye laid:
   I lov'd you both, and mourn your hapless fall.

Abb.
   They were your friends, my lord?

Freb.
   I lov'd them both. How does the Lady Jane?

Abb.
   She bears misfortune with intrepid soul.
   I never saw in woman, bow'd with grief,
   Such moving dignity.

Freb.
                                            Ay, still the same.
   I've known her long: of worth most excellent;
   But in the day of woe she ever rose
   Upon the mind with added majesty,
   As the dark mountain more sublimely tow'rs
   Mantled in clouds and storm.


Enter Manuel and Jerome .
Man.

 pointing .
   Here, my good Jerome, here's a piteous sight.

Jer.
   A piteous sight! yet I will look upon him:
   I'll see his face in death. Alas, alas!
   I've seen him move a noble gentleman!
   And when with vexing passion undisturb'd,
   He look'd most graciously.

 Lifts up in mistake the cloth from the body of Rezenvelt , and starts back with horror .
   Oh! this was the bloody work! Oh! oh, oh, oh!
   That human hands could do it!


 Drops the cloth again .
Man.
   That is the murder'd corpse; here lies De Monfort.


 Going to uncover the other body .
Jer.

 turning away his head .
   No, no! I cannot look upon him now.

Man.
   Didst thou not come to see him?

Jer.
   Fy! cover him—inter him in the dark—
   Let no one look upon him.

Bern.

 to Jer .
   Well dost thou show the abhorrence nature feels
   For deeds of blood, and I commend thee well.
   In the most ruthless heart compassion wakes
   For one, who, from the hand of fellow man,
   Hath felt such cruelty.

 Uncovering the body of Rezenvelt .
   This is the murder'd corse:

 Uncovering the body of De Monfort .
                                            But see, I pray!
   Here lies the murderer. What thinkst thou here?
   Look on those features, thou hast seen them oft,
   With the last dreadful conflict of despair,
   So fix'd in horrid strength.
   See those knit brows; those hollow sunken eyes;
   The sharpen'd nose, with nostrils all distent;
   That writhed mouth, where yet the teeth appear,
   In agony, to gnash the nether lip.
   Thinkst thou, less painful than the murd'rer's knife
   Was such a death as this?
   Ay, and how changed too those matted locks!

Jer.
   Merciful heaven! his hair is grizly grown,
   Chang'd to white age, that was, but two days since,
   Black as the raven's plume. How may this be?



 
Bern.
   Such change, from violent conflict of the mind,
   Will sometimes come.

Jer.
                                            Alas, alas! most wretched!
   Thou wert too good to do a cruel deed,
   And so it kill'd thee. Thou hast suffer'd for it.
   God rest thy soul! I needs must touch thy hand,
   And bid thee long farewell.


 Laying his hand on De Monfort .
Bern.
   Draw back, draw back: see where the lady comes.


Enter Jane De Monfort. Freberg , who has been for some time retired by himself at the bottom of the stage, now steps forward to lead her in, but checks himself on seeing the fixed sorrow of her countenance, and draws back respectfully . Jane advances to the table, and looks attentively at the covered bodies . Manuel points out the body of De Monfort , and she gives a gentle inclination of the head, to signify that she understands him. She then bends tenderly over it, without speaking .
Man.

 to Jane , as she raises her head .
   Oh, madam, my good lord!

Jane.
   Well says thy love, my good and faithful Manuel:
   But we must mourn in silence.

Man.
   Alas! the times that I have followed him!

Jane.
   Forbear, my faithful Manuel. For this love
   Thou hast my grateful thanks; and here's my hand:
   Thou hast lov'd him, and I'll remember thee.
   Where'er I am, in whate'er spot of earth
   I linger out the remnant of my days,
   I will remember thee.

Man.
   Nay, by the living God! where'er you are,
   There will I be. I'll prove a trusty servant:
   I'll follow you, even to the world's end.
   My master's gone; and I indeed am mean,
   Yet will I show the strength of nobler men,
   Should any dare upon your honour'd worth
   To put the slightest wrong. Leave you, dear lady!
   Kill me, but say not this!


 Throwing himself at her feet .
Jane

 raising him .
   Well, then! be thou my servant, and my friend.
   Art thou, good Jerome, too, in kindness come?
   I see thou art. How goes it with thine age?

Jer.
   Ah, madam! woe and weakness dwell with age:
   Would I could serve you with a young man's strength!
   I'd spend my life for you.

Jane.
                                            Thanks, worthy Jerome.
   O! who hath said, the wretched have no friends?

Freb.
   In every sensible and gen'rous breast
   Affliction finds a friend; but unto thee,
   Thou most exalted and most honourable,
   The heart in warmest adoration bows,
   And even a worship pays.

Jane.
   Nay, Freberg! Freberg! grieve me not, my friend.
   He, to whose ear my praise most welcome was,
   Hears it no more! and, oh, our piteous lot!
   What tongue will talk of him? Alas, alas!
   This more than all will bow me to the earth;
   I feel my misery here.
   The voice of praise was wont to name us both:
   I had no greater pride.


 Covers her face with her hands, and bursts into tears. Here they all hang about her : Freberg supporting her tenderly , Manuel embracing her knees, and old Jerome catching hold of her robe affectionately . Bernard , abbess, monks, and nuns likewise gather round her, with looks of sympathy .

Enter two Officers of Law.
st off.
                                            Where is the prisoner?
   Into our hands he straight must be consign'd.

Bern.
   He is not subject now to human laws;
   The prison that awaits him is the grave.

st off.
   Ha! sayst thou so? there is foul play in this.

Man.

 to off .
   Hold thy unrighteous tongue, or hie thee hence,
   Nor in the presence of this honour'd dame,
   Utter the slightest meaning of reproach.

st off.
   I am an officer on duty call'd,
   And have authority to say, “How died he?”


 Here Jane shakes off the weakness of grief, and repressing Manuel , who is about to reply to the officer, steps forward with dignity .
Jane.
   Tell them by whose authority you come,
   He died that death which best becomes a man,
   Who is with keenest sense of conscious ill
   And deep remorse assail'd, a wounded spirit.
   A death that kills the noble and the brave,
   And only them. He had no other wound.

st off.
   And shall I trust to this?

Jane.
                                            Do as thou wilt:
   To one who can suspect my simple word
   I have no more reply. Fulfil thine office.

st off.
   No, lady. I believe your honour'd word,
   And will no further search.

Jane.
   I thank your courtesy: thanks, thanks to all;
   My rev'rend mother, and ye honour'd maids;
   Ye holy men, and you, my faithful friends;
   The blessing of the afflicted rest with you!
   And He, who to the wretched is most piteous,
   Will recompense you.—Freberg, thou art good;
   Remove the body of the friend you lov'd:
   'Tis Rezenvelt I mean. Take thou this charge:
   'Tis meet, that with his noble ancestors
   He lie entomb'd in honourable state.


 
   And now I have a sad request to make,
   Nor will these holy sisters scorn my boon;
   That I, within these sacred cloister walls,
   May raise a humble, nameless tomb to him,
   Who, but for one dark passion, one dire deed,
   Had claim'd a record of as noble worth,
   As e'er enrich'd the sculptur'd pedestal.


 Exeunt .

NOTES
 This scene has been very much altered from what it was in the former editions of this play, and scene fifth of the last act will be found to be almost entirely changed. These alterations, though of no great importance, are, I hope, upon the whole, improvements.
 I have put above newly-covered instead of new-made grave, as it stands in the former editions, because I wish not to give the idea of a funeral procession, but merely that of a hymn or requiem sung over the grave of a person who has been recently buried.
 Should this play ever again be acted, perhaps it would be better that the curtain should drop here; since here the play may be considered as completed, and what comes after, prolongs the piece too much when our interest for the fate of De Monfort is at an end.
 Note . —The last three lines of the last speech are not intended to give the reader a true character of De Monfort , whom I have endeavoured to represent throughout the play as, notwithstanding his other good qualities, proud, suspicious, and susceptible of envy, but only to express the partial sentiments of an affectionate sister, naturally more inclined to praise him from the misfortune into which he had fallen.


HENRIQUEZ: A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN The King of Castile  Alonzo , surnamed the Noble .

Don Henriquez , his general .

Don Carlos , a noble soldier, attached to Henriquez .

Antonio , a young gentleman in love with Mencia .

Balthazar .

Blas , a youth in the service of Leonora .

A Friar , confessor to Henriquez .

Diego , steward to Henriquez .

Courtiers, confessors, attendants, gaolers, &c .

WOMEN Leonora , wife of Henriquez .

Mencia , sister to Leonora .

Inez , an attendant of Leonora .



Scene, the castle of Henriquez , a few leagues from the town of Zamora, and in the said town. Time, the beginning of the th century.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A grove near the castle.

Enter Diego with a letter, muttering to himself before he speaks aloud .
Diego.
   The honour of the house of Altavera,
   Of all those chiefs, whose bread I and my sires
   So many years have eaten without reproach,
   Must it be sullied now?—Diego Furnez
   Must take upon him, then, th' informer's office,
   With all its paltry baseness and concealment.
   To Altavera's lords, with manly freedom,
   My fathers spoke, and so have I. But then
   I did oppose this marriage which hath sunk
   His noble pride so low. Such information
   From me would be suspected; and his anger,
   When so excited, might, perhaps,—a blow!
   Diego Furnez could not live disgraced,
   And, dying unrevenged, would die disgraced.
   Ay, it must be; necessity compels me.

Lays down the letter, then looking hastily about, snatches it up again.
   Surely I hear a stranger's voice approaching.
   I'll drop it farther on, and watch my time,
   When Don Henriquez may be sure to find it.


 Exit .

Enter Antonio and Mencia , speaking as they enter .
Ant.
   Forget thee, Mencia! Yes, I will forget thee
   When means are found to make it possible.
   Thine image, independent of my will,
   Where'er I am, is with me; night and day
   Before my fancy's eye it smiles or weeps;
   Motions its arms, as thou wert wont to do,
   When distance barr'd our intercourse of words;
   Is present with me more than present things;
   And makes my wretched life a maniac's dream,
   Lost and unprofitable.
   Is there some potent spell to lay this sprite
   That haunts me to my ruin? Vain, vain words!
   Thou canst not be forgotten.

Men.
   Thou but deceiv'st thyself: there are two spells,
   Absence and time, which have to many a lover
   His peace restored. Fate has between us now
   A barrier placed, which all my feeble strength
   Could not o'erleap; therefore I have consented.

Ant.
   Consented! O to what hast thou consented?
   To more than the rejecting of my love,
   Which thy ambitious sister, since the day
   That raised her, as the wife of Don Henriquez,
   To greatness, which she knows not how to bear,
   Regards as too presumptuous. Thou art silent.
   To more than this hast thou consented, Mencia?

Men.
   Question me not; I cannot tell thee now;
   Yet thou shouldst know. I have, alas! I have,
   O'ercome by prayers, and wearied with contention,
   Consented to bestow my luckless hand
   On one who tried, but could not win my heart:
   And I am bound—

Ant.
   Thou art not! no, thou art not!

Men.
   Alas, I am! and so will hold myself.

Ant.
   Thou shalt not! Holdst thou sacred every tie,
   But those that bind thee to thy earliest friend;
   To him who was thy playmate and thy guard;
   Who through thy native woods ran by thy side;
   Play'd with thee, sang with thee, built thy first bower,


 
   Where thou, his mimic mistress, kept thy state,
   Screen'd from the mid-day sun, when he, the while,
   Still pleased thee, as thou lentst thine eager ear,
   With tales of wonderment and tales of love?
   All claims but his! O say not so, sweet Mencia!
   Let me implore thee on my bended knee!

Men.
   Hush! rise! we are observed; this spot is now
   Traversed by busy feet, in preparation
   For a gay feast to-night, held at the castle,
   In honour of Henriquez' safe return.
   Leave me, I pray!

Ant.
                                            By unfrequented paths,
   Through rugged wilds I've travelled many a league:
   Three irksome days and nights in that deep grove,
   The ruin of an ancient sepulchre,
   Like some unhallow'd spirit, I have haunted
   To watch a lucky moment when thy steps
   Should lead thee near the place; and having found thee,
   Thinkst thou to cast me off with fev'rish haste,
   As thou wouldst shake an adder from thy robe?

Men.
   Nay, nay! for yonder Don Henriquez comes;
   There's danger here.

Ant.
   And come who will, and let what will betide,
   Despair thinks not of danger.

Men.
   Retire, retire, and we shall meet again.

Ant.
   When? where? this night? to-morrow? name the time.

Men.
   To-morrow by the early dawn I'll meet thee.
   No; not to-morrow, but the following morn.

Ant.
   And at that early hour?

Men.
   Even so: retire.

Ant.
   I have thy word for this?

Men.
   Thou hast, thou hast.
 Exit Antonio .

 Alone .

   Ay, he has loved me as no other will,
   And thus he is requited. Woe the day!
   Why did my timid spirit yield so poorly
   To an ambitious sister?—Must it be?
   Henriquez is a man whose native feelings
   Of honour and of justice rise indignant
   Against the slightest breach of honest faith.
   The interests of his house to him were nothing
   Opposed to generous ties—to simple right.
   I will to him—ah, no! I dare not do it.

 Looking out .
   He is at hand. That paper keeps his eye
   Intently occupied.—What can it be?
   Perhaps some letter dropp'd by poor Antonio,
   And then all is discover'd.
Enter Henriquez .

   You twist that letter in your hand, my lord,
   As a most worthless thing. May I presume?
   I am not curious.

Hen.
   Yet thou hast a mind,
   Not being curious, just to peep into it.
   Well; it might case thy silken threads, perhaps,
   Or wrap thy scented comfits. Take it then.

 Offering her the letter, and then drawing it back .
   No; spells lurk in such crooked lines as these
   To work unhappy fancies out of nothing.
   Perhaps same hateful witch has mutter'd o'er it
   Her blasting benison; thou shalt not have it:
   I'll put it up to light my ev'ning lamp.
   Thou goest?

Men.
                                            I have been too long truant here,
   And my neglected task calls me within.


 Exit .
Hen.

 alone .
   Why look I still upon this foolish scroll?
   As foolish as 'tis spiteful. Leonora
   Has for her wicked solace in my absence
   My noble friend—my second self received!
   Good likely tale!
 Reads again .

   “An unknown friend cautions thee to beware of
   Don Juan. He has played thee false in thine
   absence, and destroyed thy wife's virtue and thine
   own honour. Look to it, if thou wouldst not become
   the most contemptible of all doating husbands: for
   thy fond security will make them bold, and the
   world will point at thee ere long.”
   The common cant of all those friends unknown.
   Juan and Leonora! blest, most blest,
   In friendship and in love! This canker'd fiend
   Is stung therewith. Envy most devilish,
   Yet not uncommon in this wicked world.
   Well; it shall serve to light my evening lamp;
   God mend the wretch who wrote it.


 Exit .
SCENE II.
A small ornamented apartment in the castle. Enter Blas and Inez , carrying different things in their hands, speaking as they enter.
Inez.
   I leave thee too these cases of perfume,
   And this small book of tales and warlike sports.
   Place them as I have said, and be thou secret:
   Be sure thou tell to no one for what guest
   This chamber is prepared.

Blas.
   But if I should, I should not break my word.
   I guess'd it out myself; thou didst not trust me.

Inez.
   Yes, but I did confirm thy guess, more surely
   To rivet thee to secrecy. Thy lady
   Will greatly be displeased, shouldst thou divulge it;
   Therefore be prudent.—When thy task is done,
   Thou'lt find me in the lower corridor.


 Exit .
Blas.

 murmuring to himself .
   Be secret, tell to no one, and thy lady
   Will greatly be displeased! What is't to me?
   And yet I do not like this strange concealment.


 Employs himself in arranging different things, whilst he sings part of an old ballad .
SONG.
   The watch-dog bays from the southern wall,
   And hounds and spaniels repeat his call;
   The warders in the court are speaking,
   The merlins on their perch are shrieking.


 

   The dame she started from her seat,
   And her lover's heart did quickly beat.
   “The wall is gain'd, the drawbridge crost,
   Your lord is return'd, and we are lost.”

   “Nay, fie upon thy witless fear!
   See, quickly don this woman's gear;
   And boldly cross the crowded hall,
   'Mid serfs and grooms and spearmen all.

   “They with glad greetings are, I trow,
   Too busy by far to heed thee now;
   Yet word or answer give to none,
   But straight to the portal and swiftly be gone.”

   The dame put on her joyous face,
   And she welcomed her lord with a hearty embrace.
   Quoth she to herself, “Some warlike fray
   Will call him forth another day.”

   A fray full soon hath called him forth,
   And he is gone to the restless north;
   But he—beshrew the wayward wight!
   Returns again at the dead of night.

   The lover's face turn'd cold and pale,
   But never a whit did the lady quail.
   “A friar's cowl and frock thou'lt find
   Securely pent that chest behind:

   “Be thou a friar instantly,
   And to the castle's chapel fly,
   And in the pale lamp's flickering shine,
   Bend lowly at Saint Martin's shrine.”

Enter Henriquez .
Hen.
   And is it thou, good Blas, who singst so well?
   I heard thee as I cross'd the gallery,
   And was led hither by the well-known tune
   That, when a boy, I have so often heard.
   But cease not; sing the rest of that old story.

Blas.
   In sooth, my lord, I have forgot the rhymes.

Hen.
   But canst thou not, without the rhymes, remember
   The third escape which for her lawless lover
   The wily dame devised?

Blas.
   Yes, in a groom's attire she sent him forth
   To hold her husband's stirrup at the gate,
   As he alighted from his warlike barb.

Hen.
   Was not her simple lord at length revenged?
   And how was that, I pray?

Blas.
   She had a step-son, who from Palestine
   Return'd, and hearing of his father's wrongs,
   Swore to revenge them.

Hen.
   E'en so; I now remember it distinctly,
   And the concluding lines sound in my ears.
   They fought in the portal,
   They fought in the tower,
   They fought in the hall, and the lady's high bower,
   There they struggled and fought, till the lady at last,
   A pale bleeding corse, from the lattice was cast.

   Ay, many a time I've listened to that ditty:
   She was a wicked dame of whom it tells.
   Thinkst thou the rhymester knew of such a one?
   Or be there any such?

Blas.
   I do not know: there may—and there may not.

Hen.
   May, or may not! thou needst not blush so deeply.
   What's thy employment here? Some new arrangement.
   Thy lady's private closet so disturb'd!
   Ay, and this curtain'd couch!—For whom, I pray,
   Prepare ye this, good Blas?

Blas.
   I do not know, my lord.

Hen.
   Thou dost not know!
   Why dost thou blush so strangely as thou speakst?
   Compose thyself; I do not seek to know.
   What scented thing is this? it smells most sweetly.

Blas.
   It is a box of aromatic gums.

Hen.
   It needs must be some dainty fair, for whom
   Such delicacies are provided. Ay,
   And learned too, I guess, for here are books.
   A soldier's book!

 Turning over its leaves .
   Ha! 'tis mine own old friend.

Blas.
   His name is then upon it.

Hen.
   Thou seemst alarm'd, methinks: how's this? whose name?

Blas.
   I do not know, my lord. Your own old friend.

Hen.
   It was the book I call'd so: in my youth
   It was my favourite study.

Blas.
   I had forgot; the book is yours, my lord,
   And only borrow'd now for his amusement.

Hen.
   For her's, thou meanst: is't not a female guest?
   Blushing again! What mystery is here?
   Tell me for whom this chamber is prepared.

 Pause .
   Thou wilt not answer. Nay, I will not force thee;
   But tell me only—is this guest a woman?
   What! silent still! 'tis not a woman then?

Blas.
   No, good my lord.

Hen.
   Some fav'rite page, perhaps, who for the night
   Must near his dame be lodged?—It is not this?
   I do command thee tell me who it is;

 Taking hold of him roughly .
   For by thy face I see too well thou knowest.
   What guest sleeps here to-night?

Blas.
   Don Juan is the guest; this is the room
   Where he is wont to sleep.

Hen.
   Is wont to sleep! Has he been here of late?

Blas.
   'Tis said he has been here; for me, I know not.


 Henriquez , turning slowly from him, walks to the bottom of the stage .


 
Blas

 aside, looking after him .
   Surely he heard my words; yet calm and silent!
   No further question following my reply!
   Fool that I was to be so much afraid,
   Since he regards it lightly.

Hen.

 returning .
   Where is thy lady?

Blas.
   She gives directions in the pillar'd hall;
   At least I left her there a short time since.

Hen.
   Go, see, and bring me word.

 Exit Blas .
   Question a youth—a menial—any one,
   Of what regards the honour of my wife!
   I married her in the full confidence
   That she possess'd all good and noble virtues
   Which should become a brave Castilian's wife,
   And from herself alone will I be certified
   Of what this hateful mystery imports.

 After a pause, and then muttering indistinct words .
   Peace, bad suggestions, from mean baseness sprung!
   No! till I hear from her own falt'ring tongue
   The glossing poor pretences of the guilty,
   And see upon her once ingenuous face
   The varied hues of shame, I'll not believe it.
   I am a fool to take it so intently.
   This casket here, which was my earliest gift!
   And does it still contain that golden heart,
   The token of my love? I fain would know.

 Looking at it near, and taking it in his hands .
   It is not lock'd; the lid is slightly latch'd:
   In mine own house, methinks, without reproach,
   I may undo the bauble.
 Opens it .
What is here?
   Don Juan's picture, and a letter, too;
   I know the writing well.
 Reads .

   “Dear mistress of my soul! How shall I thank
   thee for that favour which has raised me from
   despair! Though thy heart has not always been
   mine, and I have sighed long to subdue it, yet I
   cherish my present felicity as if thou hadst loved me
   always, and no other had ever touched thy heart.
   I will come to the feast as a masquer, and for the
   reason suggested to me, unknown to Henriquez.
   The bearer of this will return with the key of the
   private door to the grove, and I shall come through
   the narrow path about nightfall.”


 After a pause .
   Things have been done, that, to the honest mind,
   Did seem as adverse and impossible,
   As if the very centre cope of heaven
   Should kiss the nether deep.
                                            And this man was my friend!
   To whom my soul, shut from all men besides,
   Was free and artless as an infant's love,
   Telling its guileless faults in simple trust.
   Oh the coil'd snake! It presses on me here
 His hand on his heart 
as it would stop the centre throb of life.

 Returning to the casket, and taking out other papers .
   And sonnets, too, made on her matchless beauty,
   Named Celia, as his cruel shepherdess.
   Ay; she was matchless, and it seems was cruel,
   Till his infernal arts subdued her virtue.
   I'll read no more. What said he in the letter?
 Reads again .

   “The bearer will return with the key, and I'll
   come by the path at nightfall.”

   Night falls on some who never see the morn.


Re-enter Blas .
Blas.
   My lord, I've found her: Donna Leonora
   Has bid me say she will be with you instantly.

Hen.
   I cannot see her now: I am not well.
   I shall be better shortly: tell her so.
   I'll rest me in my chamber for an hour,
   And would not be disturb'd. Prevent her coming;
   And say I would repose. Go, tell her quickly.


 Exeunt severally .
SCENE III.
Enter Leonora and Mencia , followed by Diego , speaking as they enter .
Diego.
   It shall be done; I understand you, madam;
   Those lofty plumes must grace the seat of honour,
   The chair of Don Henriquez.

Leo.
   Yes; and the chair of Don Henriquez' wife:
   See that they both be graced.

Diego.
                                            Never but once,
   Lady, forgive the freedom of my words,
   Never but once before was chair of state
   Beneath this roof so crested: years gone by,
   When Don Henriquez' father, from the king,
   Held in these parts, then threaten'd with commotions,
   A regent's power. And then his noble lady,
   Although the blood of kings ran in her veins,
   Did at due distance humbly take her place
   On a low stool, unmark'd by any honour.

Leo.
   Ay, good Diego, such meek humble dames
   Have lived, as we are told, in former days.
   Do as I have desired thee.

Diego

 aside, murmuring as he goes out .
                                            Lofty dame!
   Making so proud a stir, like some pert hedgeling,
   Chirping and flutt'ring in an eagle's nest.


 Exit .
Men.
   Sister, you aggravate the mark'd dislike
   That old domestic bears you: be more gentle.

Leo.
   O he dislikes me not; it is his humour.
   Dislike me! Have I not to him and his
   Been even profuse in gifts? The foolish thought!

Men.
   Ay; but the meekness of his former lady,
   She, too, who had a king's blood in her veins,
   Dwells in his heart, and beggars all thy gifts.

Leo.
   Thou'rt fanciful.



 
Men.
                                            Nay, nay! and why so fond
   Of splendid pomp? Compared to what thou wast,
   Thy marriage with Henriquez made thee great;
   This doth not make thee greater; woe the day!
   Nor happier neither.

Leo.
                                            Woe the day! Poor dove!
   That would beneath the cottage eaves for ever
   Sit moping in the shade with household birds,
   Nor spread thy silver plumage to the sun.

Men.
   The sun hath scorch'd my wings, which were not made
   For such high soaring.
   He who would raise me to his nobler rank
   Will soon perceive that I but grace it poorly.

Leo.
   Away with such benumbing diffidence!
   Let buoyant fancy first bear up thy merit,
   And fortune and the world's applause will soon
   Support the freight. When first I saw Henriquez,
   Though but the daughter of a humble house,
   I felt the simple band of meadow flowers
   That bound my hair give to my glowing temples
   The pressure of a princely coronet.
   I felt me worthy of his love, nor doubted
   That I should win his heart, and wear it too.

Men.
   Thou dost, indeed, reign in his heart triumphant;
   Long may thy influence last.

Leo.
   And fear not but it will. These pageantries
   Give to the even bliss of wedded love
   A varied vivifying power, which else
   Might die of very sloth. And for myself,
   My love for him, returning from the wars,
   Blazon'd with honours, as he now returns,
   Is livelier, happier, and, methinks, more ardent,
   Than when we first were married. Be assured
   All things will favour thee, if thou hast spirit
   To think it so shall be. Thou shak'st thy head.
   It is not reason, but thy humble wish,
   Thy low ignoble passion that deceives thee,
   And conjures up those fears. Weak wav'ring girl!
   Art thou not bound?

Men.
   Weakness in yielding to your will, indeed,
   Has fetter'd me with bands my heart disowns.

Leo.
   Fy! say not so. Hush! let not that sad face
   O'ercloud the joy my gen'rous lord will feel,
   When he discovers what we have conceal'd,
   With playful art, to make his joy the keener.
   Hush! here comes Blas again.


Enter Blas .
                                            How is my lord?
   Will he not see me now?

Blas.
                                            He will not yet.
   I have been watching near his chamber door,
   And when I gently knock'd, as you desired,
   He answer'd me with an impatient voice,
   Saying his head was drowsy, and lack'd rest.

Leo.
   I'll go myself.

Blas.
   Nay, madam, do not yet.
   I guess that some cross humour has disturb'd him;
   Sleep will compose it.

Leo.
   Humour, dost thou say!
   He ne'er was cross with me.


 Exeunt .
ACT II. SCENE I.
The private apartment of Henriquez , with his chair and table, and a lamp burning on the table; the stage lighted only by this lamp .

Enter Henriquez with a sword in his hand, which he lays on the table in the light, shrinking back as he looks at it .
Hen.
   The blood!—this blood!—his blood!—O dismal change!
   When rose the sun of this sad day; how gladly
   Would I have shed mine own, to have sav'd one drop
   Of what was then so dear!
 Pushing it into the shade .
Be from my sight!
   It wrings my heart: and yet so black a stream,
   So base, so treacherous, did never stain
   The sword of holy justice.

 After sitting down, and gazing some time on the ground .
   This is a pause of rest from the first act,
   The needful act of righteous retribution.
   Oh! is it rest? The souls that fell from light
   Into the dark profound, cut off from bliss,
   Had rest like this.

 Pressing his temples tightly with both hands .
   How furiously these burning temples throb!
   Be still! be still! there's more behind to do;
   But no more blood: I will not shed her blood.

 Knocking at the door .
   Who's there?

Voice.
   Are you awake, my lord?

Hen.
   What dost thou want?

Voice

 without .
   The banquet is prepared, the guests assembled,
   Your grooms are waiting, and your vestments ready.
   Will you not please, my lord, to let them enter?

Hen.

 to himself .
   The guests assembled! Vile bewild'ring dream!
   I had forgot all this. I must appear.

Voice

 without .
   Will you be pleased, my lord, to let them enter?

Hen.
   Be still—be still; I'll open to them presently.


 Exit hastily into an inner chamber, taking the sword with him .


 
SCENE II.
The grand hall of the castle lighted up magnificently . Leonora, Mencia, Carlos , and company discovered; music, which presently ceases, and Enter a Servant .
Leo.

 aside to servant .
   How is thy master? Has he left his chamber?

Serv.

 aside to Leonora .
   Yes; he will soon appear; he is preparing.

Leo.

 aloud .
   Indeed, indeed, I have been much concern'd
   That Don Henriquez has, from sudden illness,
   Been tardy in respect to noble guests
   Whom he so truly honours; but I hope—

 Flourish of trumpets .
   Ha! who is this? Some guest in princely state.


Enter Servant.
Serv.
   The king is at the gate.

Leo.
   The king! a great surprise! unlooked-for honour!
   I'll to the gate.
 To the music .
Strike up a royal welcome!


 Exeunt Leonora, Carlos , and others, while the music plays a grand martial air; then

Re-enter Leonora , &c., conducting the King, attended, who receives the homage, and continues speaking in dumb-show to many of the company, till the music ceases .
King

 to Leonora .
   Fair hostess, I am come in homely trim
   For such a gay assembly.

Leo.
   Your poor servants
   Are greatly honour'd by this condescension;
   A glad surprise, so far beyond our hopes.

King.
   Ay, and beyond mine own, fair dame; but finding
   From wrecks of mountain torrents, or neglect,
   The straight road to Zamora was impassable,
   I took the wider compass, and proceeding
   Through these domains by favour of the night,
   Your castle from its woods look'd temptingly,
   And beckon'd me afar to turn aside.
   The light from every lattice gaily stream'd,
   Lamps starr'd each dusky corridor, and torches
   Did from the courts beneath cast up the glare
   Of glowing flame upon the buttress'd walls
   And battlements, whilst the high towers aloft
   Show'd their jagg'd pinnacles in icy coldness,
   Clothed with the moon's pale beam.
   —It pleased my fancy;
   And here I am, a hasty visitor,
   Who must Zamora reach by early day;
   Where many a lofty lord, and learned clerk,
   And all the rogues and robbers of the district
   Await my coming.

Car.
   All of them, my liege?

King.
   I spoke at random, like a graceless layman:
   More than the church's portion were presumption,
   A tithe of them will do.—Here is Henriquez.


Enter Henriquez , richly dressed .
Hen.
   My humble homage to your highness: welcome
   To my poor house, so honour'd by your presence.

King.
   I thank thee, brave Henriquez, but I fear
   'Tis an untimely visit; thou'rt unwell.

Hen.
   Nought but a passing ailment; do not name it.

King.
   In faith your face is wan, and strangely changed,
   And would become a sober beadsman's frock
   More than a festive mantle. How is't with you?
   Retire again to rest.

Hen.
   My face speaks falsely, I am much recover'd.
   Here is the cup of welcome; will your grace
   Be pleased to honour me.


 Taking a cup from a servant, and presenting it on one knee to the King.
King.
   All good be on your head, and this fair dame's!

 Bowing to Henriquez and Leonora , and then drinking .
   Fair ladies and brave lords, well be ye all!


 Bowing to the company, and drinking again .
Hen.

 to the servant, who is pouring out a cup for him .
   Up; fill it to the brim.
   Health to the king, and a long happy reign!

 Drinks .
   To all my honour'd guests health and good welcome!


 Drinks again .
King.
   A goodly company: here are, methinks,
   High blood enough, plumed hats and coronets,
   To furnish out a court.

Leo.
   They honour this poor feast which I have fashion'd.
   To grace my lord's return.

King.
   You have done well; and I should grace it too,
   Who was the greatest gainer by his absence,
   When he with brave companions like himself
   Against the Moors did for the state good service,
   As Alcantara, by their valour won,
   And now a noble hold for Christian knights,
   Can nobly testify.
   I speak not of the Navas de Tolosa,
   Where he upon that memorable day
   Broke through the Moslem chain of armed guards,
   Changing their strength to slaughter and dismay:
   We are too apt to speak of recent services.
   Former or recent, would I could repay them!



 
Hen.
   Your bounty has already done it nobly.

King.
   Fy, fy! a trifle; what would scarce maintain
   A rustic lord, who dozes life away
   In his porch'd hall, where hawks wink on the perch,
   And hounds lie sleeping round him. Take this ring:
   My royal father wore it many a day;
   And whatsoe'er thou shalt request of me,
   Returning to my hand this pledge again,
   It shall be granted, were it half the realm.

Hen.

 receiving it on his knee .
   I thus receive it with all humble duty.

 Rising with forced animation .
   But let us now be gay: the time wears on.
   By early dawn I must attend your highness,
   To reach Zamora by th' appointed hour.

Leo.
   I am rejoiced to see you so recovered.


 To Henriquez .
Hen.
   I thank you, lady; let your guests receive
   Your present courtesies.—Where are the minstrels?
   Let them strike up a dance: we are too still.

Leo.
   Doubt not we shall be gay; but we expect
   Some merry masquers here to join our revels;
   They should have come ere now.

Hen.
   Wait ye for such? Are they not come already?

Leo.
   How so, my lord?

Hen.
                                            The world is full of them:
   Who knows the honest unclothed worth of those
   That by your side may stand, drink from your cup,
   Or in your bosom lie? We are all masquers.

King.
   Your wine has cheer'd you to a gibing humour;
   You are severe, my lord, on this poor world.

Hen.
   If I have said amiss, e'en let it pass:
   A foolish rev'ller may at random speak:
   Who heeds his idle words?—Music strike up.


 Music; the King retires with Henriquez to the bottom of the stage, and the guests prepare to dance, when Blas with a face of horror enters the hall, and beckons Carlos aside .
Car.
   What dost thou want?

Blas.
                                            A fearful thing has happen'd;
   And to my lord, or Donna Leonora,
   It may not hastily be told.

Car.
                                            What is't?

Blas.
   A murder'd body near the castle lies,
   But newly slain; and they who found it swear
   For well they know his form and countenance,
   It is Don Juan's body.

Leo.

 who has stolen near them to listen .
   Don Juan's body , saidst thou? Is he dead?

Blas.
   Yes, madam, they have found him in the wood
   Lifeless and—

Leo.
                                            Oh, I guess thy horrid look!
   And he is murder'd? Dreadful, barbarous deed!


 Exclaiming aloud .

 All quit their places for the dance, and crowd round Leonora , who is supported by Mencia , appearing also affected, whilst Henriquez , at a distance, observes them intently .
Leo.

 recovering .
   O Carlos! tell my lord the horrid tale.
   I must retire.


 Exit with Mencia and other ladies .
King

 coming forward with Henriquez .
                                            Some strange commotion here!

Hen.

 to Carlos .
   What has befallen?

Car.
   What will most keenly rend your noble heart;
   Yet to a soldier I should tell it plainly:
   Don Juan, from some secret villain's stroke,
   Has met his fate this night, and near your walls.

Hen.
   Away! Howl not so wild a dirge to me:
   Far distant from these walls, full many a league,
   Don Juan surely is. Ye are deceived.

Blas

 shaking his head .
   No, no! O no!

Car.
   I fear he tells us true.

Hen.
   He wrote to me, not many days ago,
   A letter, dated from his northern seat,
   Which made no mention of his visit here:
   If what you say be true, it is most strange.
   I'll be assured if it, indeed, be so.


 Going hastily .
Car.

 preventing him .
   Retire, and I will see it ascertain'd:
   You shall not look upon so sad a sight.

King

 to Henriquez .
   Retire, my lord: it were not fit you went.
   Your noble guests beseech you to retire.

Hen.
   I will obey your grace. I thank ye all.


 Exeunt Henriquez and Carlos severally .
King

 to the guests .
   Were it not well that we should all retire?
   Our banquet to a funeral wake is turn'd,
   And cannot cheer us now.


 Exeunt .
SCENE III.
An inner court of the castle, lighted by a lamp over the gateway, the stage otherwise dark. Enter Diego and two servants, with dark lanterns, speaking loud and confusedly as they enter.
 st serv.
   I could be sworn to it. Go tell my lord:
   Why hold we here such idle altercation?

Diego.
   He must not be disturbed.

 st serv.
   How not disturbed?


Enter Carlos above, looking down from an open corridor .
Car.
   Ho! who are ye who talk so eagerly?
   What is the matter?

 st serv.
   The murderer is found: come down, Don Carlos!
   For we would fain pursue him through the wood,
   But thus unarm'd we dare not.


 Exit Carlos above .


 
 d serv.
   Ay, he is coming: he will be our warrant,
   And tell us what to do.


Re-enter Carlos below .
Car.
   Well, friends, what did you say? the murderer?

 st serv.
   Yes; I can swear 'tis so: I would have followed him,
   But, lacking arms, I durst not.

 d serv.
   So would I.

 st serv.
   Give us some stout companions and good weapons,
   And, scatt'ring different ways, we'll scour the wood,
   And seize him shortly.

Car.
                                            In the wood ye found him?

 d serv.
   Yes; as we went, out-stripping our companions,
   To bear Don Juan's body to the castle.

Car.
   How guess you 'tis the murderer?

 st serv.
   A youthful cavalier for several days
   Has been secreted in the wood. I've seen him;
   And the dark form that cross'd my light e'en now
   I could be sworn is he.

Diego.
   It is not likely that the murderer
   Should be so near the slain. He would, methinks,
   Run from the spot forthwith.

Car.
                                            True, ne'ertheless
   A mind distracted in a wood so tangled
   Might run and make no way.
 To servants .
Go ye forth:
   I will myself assist your search. But, first,
   We'll fetch our weapons. Ha! what noise is that?

 Noise without .
   'Tis voices at the gate.

 st serv.
                        It is the body.

 Voice calling from the outer court .
                                            Ho, there!
   Who watch within? Lend us your aid,
   We know not where to bear it.

Omnes.
                                            It is the body.


 Exeunt, running eagerly through the gateway .

Enter Mencia below, who has appeared before listening in the corridor .
Men.
   He will be found and seiz'd: they'll have no mercy.
   The dreadful doom! O heaven, have pity on him!


Enter Inez .
Inez.
   What is the matter, madam? Whither go you?

Men.
   I cannot tell.

Inez.
                                            Go in, I do beseech you,
   And stay in your apartment. I, mean time,
   Will be upon the watch, and bring you word
   When they return. Think you that there has been,
   For I have listen'd too, a cavalier
   Secreted in the wood?

Men.
                                            No; heed me not;
   I know not what I say.

Inez.
   Yet stay not here, lest you should raise suspicion;
   Return to your apartment; be entreated.


 Exeunt , Inez leading off Mencia .
SCENE IV.
Enter Leonora and Carlos by opposite sides.
Car.
   Madam, I have obey'd your summons; say
   Whate'er my humble service may perform.
   How fare you after this most dismal shock?

Leo.
   As one who hath a friend and husband both
   In one dire tempest lost. And, noble Carlos,
   Grief triumphs over pride, when even to thee,
   Though knowing well thy friendly worth, I own it.
   He was—I mean Henriquez—Oh! he was
   To me most strangely alter'd ere this stroke.

Car.
   You are deceived; expecting to retain
   The undiminish'd empire of his heart
   Beyond the usual term of bridegroom weakness.
   It could not be.

Leo.
                                            No; I am not deceived.
   Sickness did yesterday for many hours
   Confine him to his chamber; yet in vain
   Did I entreat admittance—I, who used
   To soothe his saddest hours, if any sad
   Could pass when I was near him.—
   And now again he is shut up alone,
   And has refused to see me. Worthy Carlos,
   Do me a kindness: go thou to his door,
   And beg admittance; then in my behalf,
   Since by another's influence I must move him,
   Crave audience even for a few short moments.

Car.
   Nay, charming Leonora, urge him not:
   He will admit thee when he is disposed
   For soothing sympathy; to press it sooner
   Were useless—were unwise.

Leo.
   Yet go to him; he will, perhaps, to thee,
   So long his fellow-soldier and his friend,
   Unburthen his sad heart.

Car.
   You are in this deceived. His fellow-soldier
   I long have been. In the same fields we've fought;
   Slept in one tent, or on the rugged heath,
   Wrapt in our soldier's cloaks, have, side by side,
   Stretch'd out our weary length like savage beasts
   In the same cheerless lair; and many a time,
   When the dim twilight of our evening camp
   Has by my foolish minstrelsy been cheer'd,
   He has bent o'er me, pleased with the old strains
   That pleased him when a boy; therefore I may,
   As common phrase permits, be call'd his friend.
   But there existed one, and only one,


 
   To whom his mind, with all its nice reserve
   Above the sympathies of common men,
   He freely could unfold; and having lost him,
   Can I intrude upon his private thoughts
   Like one who would supply a vacant place?
   His heart, I know it well, would from such boldness
   Revolt, even with disgust.

Leo.
   Yet Juan's death did seem to move him less
   Than such dear friendship might have warranted.

Car.
   It was his custom to restrain his looks
   When strongly moved, or shun all observation.

Leo.
   And I am now become that humble thing,—
   A wife shut out from equal confidence!

Car.
   Have patience, madam, take it not so deeply.

Leo.
   I would have patience,—

Car.
                                            Hush! we're interrupted.


Enter Blas .
Blas

 to Leonora .
   Don Juan's secretary is arrived,
   Who brings with him—so has he bid me say—
   Papers of great importance, which he begs
   May, and without delay, to Don Henriquez,
   In presence of due witnesses, be read.

Leo.
   It is a happy thing; this call will rouse him;
   Be thou the bearer of this message, Carlos;
   He cannot think thee an intruder now.

Car.
   I will obey you.

Leo.
                                            And be sure immediately
   To give me notice how he has received it.

Car.
   I will not fail.


 Exeunt severally .
SCENE V.
A spacious apartment. Enter Balthazar , followed by Blas , carrying a case with papers, which he lays on a table.
Bal.

 after examining it .
   Is Don Henriquez ready, gentle youth?

Blas.
   He'll soon be here; the lady is at hand,
   With others, who will witness what you read.

Bal.
   I'm glad she comes to soothe his gloomy grief,
   For I have that to read will move him greatly.

Blas.
   I doubt it not: Don Juan loved him well,
   As it was thought.

Bal.
                                            Sayst thou, as it was thought!
   I've often seen them spend whole days together,
   Neglecting all the sports of hall or field,
   In some sequester'd corner, side by side,
   Pacing, though young, with the slow steps of age,
   Each like the other's shadow; while, by turns,
   Such power of words flow'd from them, and their eyes
   With pleasure or with gentle anger flush'd,
   As the keen wilful sporting of their minds
   Through some wild chace of thought pursued the game.
   I mark'd them oft: it was a pleasing sight.

Blas.
   Were they, indeed, such dear and loving friends?

Bal.
   Yes, gentle youth, they were. It seem'd, in truth,
   As though each kept his thoughts i' th' other's breast,
   Lock'd up e'en from himself, having when met,
   And only then, free use of his own treasure.

Blas.
   So closely knit?

Bal.
                                            Yes; I have seen Henriquez
   By Juan's sick-bed sit, night after night,
   Like tenderest nurse watching her infant charge;
   And then I've seen the tears course down his cheeks,—
   His youthful face all shrunk and pale with grief.
   Such dear and manly friendship knew I never.


Enter Leonora and Carlos , followed by Diego , who then retires with Blas to the bottom of the stage.
Leo.

 after a pause .
   I think I hear him coming.

Car.
   I think so too; yet grief is slow of foot,
   And those are rapid strides like one in haste.


Enter Henriquez , who returns slight and sullen acknowledgments to their civilities, and going directly to a seat prepared for him, sits down without speaking .
Bal.

 to Henriquez , after a pause .
   My lord, here is a will, with other papers,
   Which your deceased friend, my noble master,
   Committed to my keeping six days since,
   When he departed from his native home.
   His ancient fav'rite hound howl'd piteously
   As from the gate we prick'd our steeds, and yet
   We took no heed of it, nor thought, alas!
   That he would ne'er return.—Please you, my lord,
   That it should first be read?

Hen.
   Proceed; I'll listen.

Bal.
   From the great love, above all men besides,
   Which living he did bear you—

Hen.
                                            Nay, proceed;
   There needs no prologue to it.

Bal.

 reading .
“The last will of me, Juan de Torva, written and signed by mine own hand, as these characters testify, is this. I bequeath to my beloved, my early, my only friend, Don Henriquez d'Altavera, the whole of my lands, my castles, my dependencies, my treasures, to be possessed by him and his heirs for ever; and for as much as I have more confidence in the wisdom and generous propriety of his judgment than my own, I leave those whose names also by mine own hand are herein written, to be provided for, as he, thinking and acting for me when I shall no longer be able to think and act for myself, shall deem right. These, with the last love and blessing of my heart I bequeath to him; desiring that my poor earthly remains may be laid in the same spot where he himself shall be interred.

 
May God have mercy on the soul of a humble sinner! Done with mine own signature.
“Juan De Torva.”

   Here follow names of many old dependants,
   And witnesses who saw him sign this deed;
   Shall I repeat them?

Hen.

 motions him to forbcar, and after covering his face with his hands for a moment or two .
   You also spoke, I think, of other papers:
   The date of this is, as I guess, remote.

Bal.
   Nay, it is recent—only two months since.

Hen.
   So late as that!—You mention'd other deeds.

Bal.
   Yes, good my lord; entrusted to my keeping,
   Here is besides a marriage contract made
   Between himself and the fair Mencia.

Hen.

 starting from his chair with violent gesture .
   What didst thou say? The sister of my wife?
   Say it again: I know not what thou saidst.

Bal.
   It is, my lord, a marriage contract made
   Between himself and Donna Mencia,
   The sister of your wife; to whom by stealth,
   The lady being somewhat disinclined,
   He has of late made frequent visits; hoping
   Last night, with her consent, to have surprised you,
   When as a masquer he should join the guests,
   By asking from your love a brother's blessing.


 Henriquez falls back into his chair, uttering a deep groan .
Leo.

 rushing to him in great alarm .
   Alas! so strong an agony is here,
   The hand of death is on him.

Car.
   'Tis but the pitch and crisis of his grief:
   Be not alarm'd; he will recover quickly.


 Diego , coming forward, speaks aside to Leonora .
Diego.
   Bid all withdraw, and be with him alone
   When he recovers.

Leo.

 aside .
                                            How when he recovers?
   Alone with him! I know not what thou meanst.

Diego

 speaking to her aloud .
   My lord has from his youth been thus affected,
   When press'd by grief; I've seen him so before.
   And when the fit goes off, I've known him also
   Utter wild ravings. Solitude and stillness
   Are necessary. Pardon me this boldness.

Leo.
   Thou'st seen him thus before?

Diego.
   It is a patural infirmity;
   Let all retire and leave him.

Leo.

 motions all to retire but Carlos .
                                            Don Carlos will remain.


 To Diego .
Diego.
   None but yourself, I do beseech you, madam;
   And I will watch by you till he recover.


 Exeunt all but Diego, Leonora , and Henriquez , who, while she hangs over him, groans as before .
Leo.
   That groan again! My dear—my dear Henriquez!
   Alas! that look! thine agony is great:
   That motion too!
 He rises .
Why dost thou stare around?
   We are alone; surely thou wilt not leave me.
   Where wouldst thou be?

Hen.
                                            I' the blackest gulf of hell;
   The deepest den of misery and pain;
   Woe bound to woe—the cursed with the cursed!

Leo.
   What horrible words, if they have any meaning!
   If they have none, most piteous!—
   Henriquez; O, my lord!—My noble husband!
   I thought not thou wouldst e'er have look'd on me
   As thou hast done, with such an eye of sternness.
   Alas! and hadst thou nothing dear on earth
   But him whom thou hast lost?

Hen.
   I had, I had! Thy love was true and virtuous.
   And so it is: thy hand upon my breast.

 Pressing her hand, which she has laid upon his breast .
   I feel it—O how dear!

 Is about to kiss it, but casts it from him .
   It must not be!
   Would thou wert false! Would grinding contumely
   Had bow'd me to the earth—worn from my mind
   The very sense and nature of a man!
   Faithful to me! Go, loose thee from my side;
   Thy faithfulness is agony ineffable,
   It makes me more accursed. Cling not to me:
   To taste the slightest feeling of thy love
   Were base—were monstrous now.—Follow me not!
   The ecstasy of misery spurns all pity.


 Exit .
Diego.
   And do not follow him: O do not, madam!
   This fearful fit will soon exhaust its strength,
   And leave his reason free.

Leo.
   God grant it may! It is a fearful fit.
   But thou thyself lookst strangely, and thy visage
   Seems haggard with a passing consciousness—
   Thou dost not think—

Diego.
                                            No, no! what should I think?
   Retire to your apartment: I meantime
   Will watch my lord, that none may cross his way
   Till he be safely lodged within his chamber.


 Exeunt .
SCENE VI.
A narrow hall or passage. Enter Carlos and Balthazar .
Car.

 calling to somebody behind him as he enters .
   Go, bid those spearmen from the armourer
   Receive their pageant suits, and let the warder
   Hang o'er the battlements his sable flag!

Bal.
   And will not Don Henriquez, then, in person
   Attend the funeral rites?

Car.
                                            His ancient steward
   Has signified to me his lord's desire


 
   That I should fill his place in every thing
   Respecting this sad ceremony.

Bal.
   Have you not seen himself?

Car.
   No; grief so stern, so cover'd and profound,
   I never knew: he has refused to see me.

Bal.
   They say his ghostly father hath been summon'd:
   He'll try to soften his untoward grief.

Car.
   I hope he will; but pass we on, I pray.

Bal.
   The murd'rer has, I hear, escaped their search.

Car.
   He did escape, if it was any thing,
   Those frighten'd peasants saw.

Bal.
   In truth it is a black, mysterious deed;
   And, as it strikes my mind—

Car.
                                            Some other time:
   Pass on, I pray, our business must proceed.


 Exeunt .
ACT III. SCENE I.
The grand court of the castle.

Enter a pompous funeral procession by an arched way at the right side of the bottom of the stage, and crossing it in a diagonal line, passes out by the left side of the front; which joins the massed richness of a perspective to the distinctness of a side view.

SCENE II.
A small private apartment. Enter Leonora , walking thoughtfully across the stage; then enter Diego , upon which she turns, and goes up to him, without speaking.
Diego

 after pausing for her to speak first .
   They told me, madam, you desired to see me.

Leo.
   Yes, good Diego, I would speak with thee;
   Yet what I have to say comes of no sense,—
   Mere curiosity,—a woman's humour.
   Looking from my apartment not long since,
   Methought I saw thee in the inner court,
   Earnest in conversation with Balthazar.
   I mark'd you for a while, and his strange gestures
   Seem'd those of anger rather than of grief.

Diego.
   He was, in truth, somewhat intemperate.

Leo.
   What has disturb'd him?

Diego.
   He is a man by nature cross and captious,
   And hardly to be satisfied.

Leo.
                                            How so?
   Has aught been wanting in the funeral honours
   Paid to his master?

Diego.
                                            No; it is not that.
   He rather thinks we have been more intent
   On idle pageantry, than truly zealous
   In finding out the murd'rer of his lord;
   'Twas this did move him to unseemly warmth,
   And words which I may not repeat.

Leo.

 eagerly .
                                            What words?
   Does he suspect—No; what should he suspect?

 Pausing and gazing on Diego , who is silent .
   Thy face looks pale and haggard. Did he name him?

Diego.
   Name whom?

Leo.
                                            No, no one. This bewilder'd brain
   Will run on things too wildly fanciful.
   I'll speak to him myself; he shall be satisfied.
   Search shall be made without delay. Go to him,
   And tell him I would see him privately.

Diego.
   He is not here.

Leo.
                                            What! not within the walls?

Diego.
   Mounted upon his master's swiftest steed,
   He left the castle short while since; ere this
   He must be near Zamora.

Leo.
                                            Why such haste?

Diego.
   I know not; 'tis, perhaps, to gain admission,
   Before the opening of his royal court,
   To the king's private ear.

Leo.

 alarmed .
   Most strange! some thought— some dark imagination
   Has worked him to this frenzy.—Tell me truly
   Where his suspicions rest: for he has spoken
   Words which thou wouldst conceal. Spoke he in hints?
   O tell me all!—He did not name Henriquez?

Diego.
   No; by the noble house of Altavera,
   Had he so done that word had been his last.
   Diego Furnez, aged as he is,
   Had ne'er stood by with rapier by his side
   To hear his master's honour rudely stain'd
   With horrid imputation.

Leo.
                                            Hush! speak low.
   I meant not that! a thing too wild and frightful
   Even for a hasty thought.—But does he know
   A lurking stranger in the wood was found,
   With scared and hasty fear, confessing guilt?


 Mencia , entering behind them, and listening to the last words, rushes forward in grcat alarm .
Men.
   Confessing guilt! O trust not his confession!
   Believe not what he says! a frenzied dream!
   For mercy's sake, my sister! O, for mercy!

Leo.
   Mencia; what sudden madness seizes thee?
   Mercy! for whom dost thou implore my mercy?

Men.
   Cruel thou art to ask! My first, my dearest:
   O had no other ever look'd upon me,
   This misery had not been.

Leo.
   It is Antonio, then, for whom thou fearest?
   Is he the stranger who escaped their search?

Men.
   Has he escaped? Then heaven be praised he has!



 
Leo.
   And thou didst know that he was lurking here?

Men.
   Catch not so eagerly my foolish words;
   I think of him when any youth is mention'd.

Diego.
   Lady, we only said, “a lurking stranger:”
   It is yourself who marks him as a youth.

Men.
   I know not what I say;—I'm most unhappy:
   I will retire.

Leo.
                                            Yes; thou hadst best retire;
   And be appeased; Antonio is not found,
   Though now we know on whom to fix the charge.
 Exit Mencia .

 Gladly to Diego .

   Now it is clear: it is a blest relief!
   My good Diego, faithful, kind, old friend;
   Even for the love which thou dost bear thy lord,
   I call thee friend;—it is a blest relief.

 Taking his hand .
   It comes upon my heart,—a loaded heart,
   That was with horror press'd, and brings these tears.

Diego.
   God bless you, lady! Had I sooner known
   The steady truth and kindness of your nature,
   It had been well, for I have been perverse;
   But henceforth I will curb all wayward thoughts,
   And honour you as Don Henriquez' wife,
   And worthy so to be.

Leo.
   Cease, friend; all thy perverseness is forgotten.
Enter Carlos .

   In a good time thou com'st, my noble friend.

Car.
   How's this? Strange joy has lighten'd up your eyes,
   Unsuited to these hours of sable sadness.

Leo.
   We have discover'd Juan's murderer.

Car.
   I'm glad to hear it: have you certain proof?

Leo.
   Antonio, Mencia's lover; a wild youth,
   Whose most presumptuous love, not long ago,
   She had for Juan's nobler suit rejected,
   Is the mysterious stranger, here, by night,
   Found lurking in the wood, whose hasty flight
   So well betrayed his guilt.

Car.
                                            I will, and instantly,
   Despatch a swift pursuit, to trace his flight.
   I've seen the youth, and can describe his mien,
   And slender, graceful form. O most unlike
   One who could do a fell and bloody deed!

Leo.
   A gentle form the fellest heart may shroud.

Diego.
   I have known such to anger and to blood
   More prone than sterner men.

Car.
   You seem offended with me, but I meant not
   To question what you say. The time is precious:
   I'll send, without delay, on every track,
   Those who, I trust, will shortly seize upon him.
   Guilty or innocent. I came to say
   Those maids and holy men, as you appointed,
   Are in the chapel met, and wait your presence,
   To sing a nightly requiem for the dead,
   Who, in the vault beneath, his first still night
   Of the grave's rest doth pass.
   But we'll postpone these rites till we have done
   What must not be delayed.

Leo.
   Ay; let us lose no time.


 Exeunt .
SCENE III.
The burying vault of the castle, with monuments of the dead; and near the front of the stage, a newly covered grave, seen by the light of a lamp placed on a neighbouring tomb, the stage being otherwise dark. A solemn requiem for the dead is heard at a distance, sounding from above. As it draws to a close, Henriquez appears at the further end of the vault with a light in his hand, which he holds out from him, as if in search of some object, and, seeing the grave, casts the light from his hand, and rushes towards it
Hen.

 after gazing some time on the grave .
   And here thou liest with all thy noble parts,
   Thy lofty, liberal soul, and goodly form,
   And heart of love so thorough and so true!
   This is thy rest, the meed and recompense
   Thy generous worth hath from thy friend received!
   Thy friend! O savage heart and cruel hand!
   Fell, hateful, faithless, cowardly, and base!
   Of every baleful thing, by heaven cast off,
   Most cursed and miserable!—
   O that ere this the dust had cover'd me
   Like a crush'd snake, whose sting is yet unsheath'd!
   Would in the bloody trench some sabred Moor
   Had lanced this hold of life—this latent seat
   Of cruelty! or rather that some dart,
   Shot erring in our days of boyish sport,
   Had pierced its core! Then by my early grave
   He had shed over me a brother's tears;
   He had sate there and wept and mourn'd for me,
   When from all human hearts but his alone
   All thoughts of me had been extinguished. Juan!
   My Juan, dear, dear friend! Juan de Torva!
   Thy name is on my lips, as it was wont;
   Thine image in my heart like stirring life;
   Thy form upon my fancy like that form
   Which bless'd my happy days. How he would look,
   When with his outspread arms, as he return'd
   After some absence!—Oh, it tortures me!
   Let any image cross my mind but this!
   No, no! not this!—Sable, sepulchral gloom!
   Embody to my sight some terrible thing,
   And I will brave it.

 Pausing and looking round .
   It doth! it doth! there's form and motion in it.
   Advance, thou awful shade, whate'er thou art!


 
   Those threat'ning gestures say thou art not Juan.

 Rubbing his eyes .
   It was but fancy.—No; the soul to Him
   Who is the Soul of souls ascended hath,
   Dust to its dust return'd. There is nought here
   But silent rest that can be rous'd no more.
   Beneath this mould, some few spans deep he lies.
   So near me, though conceal'd!—Curs'd as I am,
   The cords of love e'en through this earth have power,
   Like a strong charm, to draw me to him still.

 Casting himself upon the grave .
   Burst, guilty heart! rend every nerve of life,
   And be resolved to senseless clay like this,
   So to enlap his dearer clay for ever.


Enter Carlos .
Car.

 looking round him .
   He is not here: nought see I through the gloom
   Save the cold marble of those tombs which, touch'd
   With the wan light of yon sepulchral lamp,
   Show their scroll'd ends to the uncertain sight,
   Like shrouded bodies rising from the earth.

 Going towards the grave .
   Ha! something stirring on the new raised earth!
   It is Henriquez, wrapped in frantic sorrow.

 Advancing to him .
   Henriquez! hearst thou not, noble Henriquez?
   Nay, nay! rise from the earth: such frantic grief
   Doth not become a man, and least of all
   A man whose firm endurance of misfortune
   Has hitherto so graced his noble worth.
   Giv'st thou no answer but these heavy groans?
   Thou canst not from the tomb recall the dead,
   But rouse thy spirit to revenge his death.

Hen.

 raising his head .
   What saidst thou?

Car.
                                            Quit this dismal bed of death,
   And rouse thee to revenge thy murder'd friend.

Hen.
   He is revenged; heav'n deals with guilt so monstrous:
   The hand of man is nothing.

Car.
   Ay, but the hand of man shall add its mite.

 Taking hold of his hand to raise him .
   Up from the earth! I've found the murderer.

Hen.

 springing up fiercely, and seizing him by the throat .
   Layst thou thy hand on me?
   What is or is not,
   The God of heaven doth know, and He alone.
   Darest thou with mortal breath bestow that name,
   To the dishonour of a noble house,
   On one of ancient princely lineage born?

Car.
   Let go thy frenzied grasp! Should brave Castilians
   Thus grapple hand to hand, like angry boys?
   Fit time and place shall justify my words,
   If they indeed offend.—Our watch hath seiz'd
   In hiding near the castle, most suspiciously,
   A youth who hath to Mencia's love pretended,
   Whose hand, we cannot doubt, hath done the deed;
   But if he be of such high lineage born,
   'Tis more than he hath claim'd or we will credit.
   Why drop your arms thus listless by your side;
   Your eyes upon the ground? Will you not go
   And see the prisoner, and hear him question'd?

Hen.
   Ay, ay, this is required: I'll go with thee;
   I comprehend thee now.

Car.
   And yet thou mov'st not:
   Does any sudden pain arrest thy steps?

Hen.
   I am benumb'd and faint.—I'll follow thee.


 Exeunt .
ACT IV. SCENE I.
A prison in the castle. Antonio discovered disconsolate near the front of the stage. A high door at the bottom, with stairs from it, leading down into the prison.
Ant.

 after shifting his posture several times, and sighing heavily, raises his eyes on hearing the door open gently .
   Another visit! do they vainly think,
   By oft-repeated questions, to betray
   A spent, enfeebled mind into confession?
   It is a woman! it is Mencia's self!


Enter Mencia , descending the steps into the prison.
   And comest thou to visit me, to bless
   My dismal prison-house with what were bliss
   E'en in the lowest state of human misery?
   Sweet Mencia! thou hast pity on me then.
   Pity embedded lies where love hath been,
   And love again doth from that pity spring,
   As the dropp'd seed of some fair faded flower
   Shoots its sheath'd bud from the cleft mould, first peeping
   In timid beauty, after April showers,
   Then swelling, bursting, spreading its soft leaves
   To the free air, more fragrant than before.
   Yes, I am happy, gentle Mencia,
   In spite of fate, if thou still carest for me.

Men.
   This is no time for words like these. I dread
   E'en but to look upon thee, wretched man!
   Take this disguise; it will ensure escape.
   There is a faithful friend who waits without,
   And by the postern will direct thy flight.
   Speak not, but throw these weeds about thee quickly;
   The time is precious.


 Holding out garments which she bears over her arm .
Ant.
   Thou dreadst to look upon me, yet thou comest
   To save my life—to save a murderer's life?

Men.
   I said not so in pity of thy state;
   That bloody deed I know hath been the act


 
   Of frenzied passion: in some foreign land
   Live and repent: Heaven grant thee grace for this!
   Let not man's hand, the brand of public shame,
   Be on thy wretched head!

Ant.
   The hand of man, the brand of public shame,
   Falls on the guilty head, by heaven's appointment.
   Thou riskest the salvation of thy soul
   In aiding my escape; and for my life,
   If of thy love bereft, I care not whether
   The headsman's axe, or the slow hand of nature,
   Shall rid me of it. Nay; the first were best.

Men.
   O no! upon my knees I do conjure thee.

 Attempting to kneel, but prevented by him .
   If I offend in this, heav'n will forgive me:
   For, oh! if thou art lost, I am most wretched.
   My misery or peace hangs on thy life;
   Therefore, upon my bended knees, I beg.

 Sinking from his hold to the ground .
   'Tis for myself I plead; fly instantly.

Ant.

 raising her .
   Ah dear, dear Mencia! And car'st thou thus,
   For a foul criminal,—a man of blood?
   What, then, had been thy care—may I not say—
   What, then, had been thy love—had he been innocent?

Men.
   Alas, alas! hadst thou been innocent,
   I had defied the world, with all its lures,
   Again to sever us. Yet, as thou art—

Ant.
   Misfortune, thanks! Thou hast done more for me
   Than the devoted care of many years.
   Come, then, defy the world to sever us,
   My generous Mencia; I am innocent.

Men.
   Ha! dost thou say it? Saidst thou innocent?
   And sayst thou truly so? Hast thou not done it?
   Is it no mockery of joy? O no!
   That look, that smile! Yes, thou art innocent;
   And, heaven be praised, thou art!

Ant.
   I am, indeed, of Juan's death most innocent.
   And though some circumstances do at present
   Accuse me strongly, yet, I trust in heaven,
   That on my trial so it will appear.

Men.
   Nay; do not trust. O no! for Don Henriquez,
   Made savage by despair, will have a victim,
   And catch with eagerness at every proof,
   How slight soe'er it be. Fly; quickly fly,
   And I will follow thee and share thy fortune
   Or be it good or ill.

Ant.
   O blessed words! my dear, my gen'rous love!
   My heart throbs at the thought, but cannot thank thee.
   And thou wilt follow me and share my fortune,
   Or good or ill!
   Ah! what of good can with a skulking outlaw
   In his far wand'rings, or his secret haunts,
   E'er be? O no! thou shalt not follow me.

Men.
   Good may be found for faithful, virtuous love,
   In every spot; and for the wand'ring outlaw,
   The very sweetest nooks o' the earth are his.
   And be his passing home the goatherd's shed,
   The woodman's branchy hut, or fisher's cove,
   Whose pebbly threshold by the rippling tide
   Is softly washed, he may contented live,
   Ay, thankfully; fed like the fowls of heaven
   With daily food sent by a Father's hand.

Ant.

 pressing both her hands to his heart, and then kissing them .
   Thanks, gentle, virtuous Mencia; but, alas!
   Far different is the hapless outlaw's home
   From what thy gentle fancy fashioneth.
   With lawless men he must protection find.
   Some murky cavern where the light of day
   Hath never peer'd—where the pitch'd brand, instead,
   Sheds its red glare on the wild revelry
   Of fierce banditti; or the pirate's bark,
   Where stalks the sabred ruffian o'er the deck,
   Watching his distant prey—some home-bound ship,
   With all its stores and freight of precious souls,
   Who ne'er shall greet their native shores again,
   Must be his guilty home.

Men.
                                            Alas, alas!

Ant.
   Thou shalt not follow me, nor will I fly.
   Sever'd from thee I will not live, sweet love,
   Nor shalt thou be the mate of one disgraced,
   And by the good disown'd. Here I'll remain,
   And heav'n will work for me a fair deliv'rance.

Men.
   No, no! the present means for thy escape
   Are sent to thee by heav'n. Be not so stubborn!
   With or without me fly, even as thou wilt,
   But do not linger here.

 Looking to the door on hearing it moce .
   The door—O misery! we are surprised.
   It is Henriquez; Heaven have pity on us!


Enter Henriquez , while Mencia shrinks behind Antonio .
Hen.

 advancing .
   Ha! not alone! Who is it? Wretched Mencia!

Men.

 rushing forward .
   Oh he is innocent! Have pity on us!
   Turn not away from me, noble Henriquez.

 Catching hold of him eagerly .
   Heaven knows that he is innocent.

Hen.
   Then, pray thee, be at peace; heav'n will protect him.

Men.
   Frown not; my wretchedness has made me bold.

Hen.
   Away, away! I do not frown on thee.
   Thou art the baleful cause of all this misery,
   And yet I blame thee not. Away, and leave us!

Ant.
   Retire, dear Mencia; to thy chamber go;
   It is not fit that thou shouldst tarry here.


 She retires unwillingly ; Henriquez waving his hand to quicken her retreat, and waiting in gloomy silence till she is gone .


 
Hen.
   Unhappy youth; thou hast to thine accusers
   Thine innocence asserted with the earnest
   And simple manliness of truth; yet truth,
   Supported only by the word of him
   Who is accused, will nought avail. How is it?
   If there be any circumstance that may
   Support or prove thy words, I do entreat thee
   To tell me freely, and I will, with speed,
   Use every means that may unfold it fully
   To aid thy exculpation.
 Pauses .
Is there none?
   Bethink thee well: how slight soe'er it be,
   It may to others lead of more import.

Ant.
   Thanks, generous man!

Hen.
   Nay, nay! What is thine answer?

Ant.
   Alas! four days within that fatal wood
   I have been hid; unseen of every one
   But Mencia, and those hinds who did pursue me.
   What circumstance can then avail me? No;
   Heaven, in its justice, will unfold the truth;
   In this I put my trust; proofs I have none.

Hen.
   Take the deliv'rance, then, which heaven has sent thee.
   Fly, save thy life.
 Offering a purse .
This will procure the means,
   When thou hast clear'd the precincts of the forest.
   All now is still, and favours thy escape.

Ant.
   My lord, like one stunn'd with astonishment,
   I thank your gen'rous care. But, Don Henriquez,
   Though born of blood less noble than your own,
   An outlaw's fate, from friends and country banish'd,
   My honest fame blurr'd with imputed guilt,
   Is not deliv'rance such as I accept,
   Such as a true Castilian can accept.
   You offer it in pity of my youth,
   Therefore I thank you; but I'll here abide
   Such vindication as becomes mine honour.

Hen.
   But should it fail thee, canst thou better brook
   A malefactor's death, the public gaze,
   The scaffold's open shame, the executioner,
   All the degrading ministry of death;
   Even that which so attainteth noble blood
   That ages wear not out th' abhorred blot,
   Disgracing all thy line? Ay, think of this:
   It makes me shudder as I utter it,
   Who have in battle faced all dreadful things.

Ant.
   In truth, it makes your strengthen'd features wear
   A ghastly hue of horror. How is this,
   That such strong sympathy should move you so?
   You think me guiltless in the very front
   Of proof that should condemn me: then, belike,
   Some shrewd suspicion of the actual hand
   That did th' accursed deed lurks in your mind.

Hen.
   Ha! Cast an accusation on mine honour!

Ant.
   No, Don Henriquez; with a friendly wish
   To do me service cam'st thou here, and sacred
   Is all that thou in privacy hast done
   Or utter'd. Yea; though thou shouldst now confess
   That thou thyself wert Juan's murderer
   Start not, these are but words of argument;
   Yea, e'en supposing this, and that my rescue
   From the uplifted axe depended on it,
   Yet would I not betray thee.

Hen.

 turning away haughtily .
   Thou art incorrigible: take thy will.

 Returning and laying down a key .
   I leave thee this; thou wilt consider of it.
   Say, is there aught that thou wouldst have me do?

Ant.
   Send me a priest. Though only such transgressions
   As youthful folly prompts rest on my mind,
   Yet would my soul, shrived by some holy man,
   His ghostly counsel take, and be at peace.

Hen.
   And be at peace! Ay, ghostly counsel may
   To such as thou give peace. O could it also—
   I know an aged friar, wise and prudent:
   Thou shalt be satisfied.


 Exit .
Ant.

 after following him with his eye as he ascends the stair at the bottom of the stage .
   But that it were so horrid and unnatural,
   A thing at strife with all consistent thoughts,
   I could believe—No; 'tis impossible.


 Retires to the bottom of the stage, and the scene closes .
SCENE II.
An antechamber.

Enter Carlos and Friar by opposite sides.
Car.
   Good morning, father! you are early here.
   Whom come you to confess?

Friar.
   I have already been with the poor prisoner.

Car.
   And thou hast heard, no doubt, the horrid truth
   Which he denies to every one besides?

Friar.
   I've heard all he confesses.

Car.
   Ay; what strange tales, what secret horrid things,
   In thy long course of ghostly ministry,
   Have in thine ear been pour'd! By this good hand,
   But that I did prefer the jointed mail
   And weapon's stroke to haircloth and the scourge,
   The roar of battle to the chaunting choir,
   I had become a friar, to learn, like thee,
   All those dark mysteries of human nature,
   To which thy mind is conscious.

Friar.
                                            Gentle son!
   Pardon my words; thou talkst in ignorance.
   A tale of guilt, wrung from the sinner's soul,
   Strikes not the fancy like a winter's tale
   Of moonlight witchery, or murder done
   I' th' secret chamber. No; a counter sympathy
   Doth quell the fancy then. Thou speakst in ignorance.

Car.
   True, father, this may be. With your permission
   I will attend you to the gate.



 
Friar.
                                            Not now.
   I'm summon'd: Don Henriquez waits for me.

Car.
   At the confessional?

Friar.
   So I believe; I meet him in the chapel.

Car.
   I am right glad of this. We marvell'd much
   He did not sooner think of ghostly comfort.

Friar.
   I have been summon'd by him once before;
   But when I came, capricious in his sorrow,
   He would not see me.

Car.
   Speak comfort to him, and enjoin some penance
   For the indulgence of such frantic grief;
   So wayward, so excessive. May God bless thee!

 Exit friar .
   Here comes our keen and fiery secretary.


Enter Balthazar .
   Return'd so soon! And hath the royal ear
   Inclin'd to thy petition?

Bal.
   Ay; every cot and castle in the realm
   At my command must open gate and hold,
   Chamber and bower; e'en the sepulchral vault,
   Whose sable scutcheon'd door hath not for years
   Upon its hinges jarr'd, must be unlock'd,
   And show its secrets to the searching light.
   But as I learn you have secured the murderer,
   I am content; here ends my brief commission.
   I pray you lead me to the prison-house:
   I burn to see the wretch.

Car.
                                            Come, follow me


 Exeunt .
SCENE III.
A chapel. Henriquez discorered on his knees by the confessional, the Friar bending over him, and muttering words in a low voice.
Friar

 aloud .
   Rise, son, in humble but assured faith!
   Repentance, and these penances endured,
   Will gain from heavenly grance full absolution
   Of this most guilty deed—of all thy sins.
   Rise, and be comforted!

 Raising him, and leading him forward .
   Be comforted!
   The worst of sinners league not with despair,
   But by their own untoward disbelief,
   The greatest sin of all. Thou smit'st thy breast,
   And shak'st thy drooping head: thou must not doubt.
   All sin is finite, mercy infinite;
   Why shouldst thou doubt that God will pardon thee?

Hen.
   I doubt it not. God's mercy pardons all
   Who truly do repent; and O how truly,
   How deeply, how intensely I repent!
   But in my breast there is a goading sense,
   An inward agony, a power repelling
   In dire abhorrence every better thought.
   The bliss of heaven for me! incongruous hope!
   My soul, my fancy, yea my very will
   Is link'd to misery; and happiness
   Comes to my thoughts like gleams of painful day
   To owls and bats, and things obscene and hateful,
   Fitted by nature for their dismal dens.
   O that I were like such! in the reft rock
   Of some dank mine coil'd up, dull and unconscious
   Of the loud hammer's sound, whose coming stroke
   Should crush me from existence!

Friar.
   Alas, alas, my son, have better thoughts.

Hen.
   Let them arise in better hearts, for mine
   A nest of stinged scorpions hath become,
   And only fit for such. Each recollection,
   Each waking fancy, like a barbed fang,
   Pierces its core with thrilling agony,
   Which yields to a succeeding, sharper sting,
   And that again to others keener still.
   So kind, so dear, such manly, true affection!
   Friendship so pure! such noble confidence!
   Love that surmounted all things! When, in passion,
   I did an outrage on his fiery blood,
   What would have hurl'd on any other head
   The instant stroke of death—he only waited—

Friar.
   Give o'er, my son; thou art too vehement.

Hen.
   He waited till my senseless rage was spent,
   Then smil'd—O such a sweet, upbraiding smile!
   Open'd his arms, and clasp'd me to his heart.
   That smile, those open'd arms, I see them now,—
   I see them constantly; where'er I turn,
   They front me like a vision of delight
   Changed to a gorgon terror.
   Yet no restraining love did plead for him:
   As though he had some common rev'ller been,
   All base suggestions were received against him,
   Were cherish'd, brooded on by dint of thought,
   Work'd to a semblance of consistent truth,
   Which, but for this, hateful ingratitude,
   All other crimes surpassing, ne'er had found
   Credence so wild. Iron heart and ruffian hand!
   Ye took your cursed will, and slew the noblest,
   The bravest, and the best, like a vile traitor!


 Beating his forchead and striding away .
Friar.
   My son, this is wild ecstasy of passion,
   Which leads not to that humble true repentance
   Our holy church enjoins.

Hen.

 returning .
   Or had I met him as an open foe,
   With accusation of defiance fairly
   Preceding vengeance; but unheard, i' th' dark!
   Tremble, ye venerable roofs, ye towers
   Of my brave fathers, men without reproach;
   Fall on my cursed head, and grind to dust


 
   What bears the honour'd semblance of their son,
   Although unmeet to bear the human form.

Friar.
   Nay, nay! I pray forbear; this violent grief
   For thy soul's weal is most unprofitable.
   Betake thyself betimes to prayer and penance.
   The sufferings of the body will relieve
   The suff'rings of the mind.

Hen.
   The sufferings of the body! They are powerless.

 Showing his hand .
   See here, short while, in agony of thought,
   Pacing the armoury where hangs the mail
   Which Juan wore, when in Tolosa's field
   We fought the turban'd Moslems side by side;
   It was his gift, which I did beg of him,
   In the proud joy I felt at his high deeds.
   How swell'd my heart! A braver knight in arms
   Fought not that day. Bold heart and potent hand,
   And lofty mien and eyes that flash'd with valour!
   Where run my words? I have forgot their drift.

Friar.
   Something which happen'd in the armoury.

Hen.
   Ay, in the armoury, as I have said,
   I struck my hand, in vehemence of action,
   On a spik'd shield, nor knew till afterwards,
   When the wild fit was past, and oozing blood
   Loaded my clammy touch, that in my flesh
   The broken iron was sheath'd.
   No; what can corporeal pain or penance do?
   That which inflicts the mental wound, which rends
   The hold of pride, wrenching the bent of nature;
   'Tis that alone hath power. Yet from the effort
   Nature starts back; my mind, stunn'd at the thought,
   Loses the use of thought.

Friar.
   I do not understand you, good my lord.

Hen.
   It matters not; you will, perhaps, hereafter.

Friar.
   You are at present feeble and exhausted,
   And lack repose; retire awhile, my son.
   Hark! on the walls without, do you not hear
   The warder's call to note the rising morn?

Hen.
   The morn! And what have I to do with morn?
   The redd'ning sky, the smoking camp, the stir
   Of tented sleepers rousing to the call,
   The snorting steed, in harness newly dight,
   Did please my fancy once. Ay; and the sweetness
   Of my still native woods, when, through the mist,
   They show'd at early dawn their stately oaks,
   Whose dark'ning forms did gradually appear
   Like slow approaching friends, known doubtfully.
   These pleased me once in better days; but now
   My very soul within me is abhorrent
   Of every pleasant thing; and that which cheers
   The stirring soldier or the waking hind,
   That which the traveller blesses, and the child
   Greets with a shout of joy, as from the door
   Of his pent cot he issues to the air,
   Does but increase my misery.—
   I loathe the light of heaven: let the night,
   The hideous unbless'd night, close o'er me now,
   And close for ever!

Friar.
   Cease, cease! and cherish not such dark despair.
   Retire to your apartment, and in prayer
   Beseech Almighty Goodness to have pity
   On a perturbed soul.

Hen.
   Pray thou for me; I will pray when I can.

Friar.
   Hark! steps along the corridor; they come
   To say an early mass for the repose
   Of the interr'd: they must not find you here.

Hen.
   And to the dead they give repose! What mass,
   What prayers, what chaunted hymns can to the living
   Give respite from this agony of soul?
   Alas, alas! there is no cure for this.


 Exeunt .
SCENE IV.
A small court before the door of the prison, which is open. Blas and other domestics discovered waiting near it.
 dom.

 to Blas .
   Goes Don Henriquez with the prisoner?

Blas.
   He does; his noble courser at the gate,
   Black Sultan, saddled stands, champing the bit,
   And casting from his mouth the flaky foam.
   Stand back; they're coming now.


Enter Antonio, Carlos , Friar , Balthazar , and Diego , from the prison .
Friar

 to Antonio .
   Be not cast down, my son, but trust in heaven!

Ant.
   And so I do; that is my stay, good father;
   And yet, methinks, these fetters might be spared.
   By Don Henriquez' orders am I thus
   Like a vile felon chain'd?

Car.
   'Tis by his orders; 'tis a stated form.
   I fear they gall you; are they clench'd too tightly?

Bal.
   Who doth a felon's deeds must e'en submit
   To bear a felon's manacles.

Ant.

 to Baltiiazar .
   Yes; man of pens, and records, and old lore,
   Such is thy narrow and ungen'rous nature.

 Turning to Carlos .
   This rough but noble soldier, bred in camps
   And midst the broil of battle, is more gentle.
   Henriquez seem'd inclined to pity me,
   To think me innocent; then, wherefore these?

Car.
   Come, we lose time, we must begin our journey
   To reach the town by close of day, Henriquez
   Being intent to gain a royal audience
   Before the sitting of to-morrow's court.


 Exeunt all but Diego , to whom enters Leonora , with something in her hand .


 
Leo.
   My good Diego, hie thee to the gate;
   And ere thy master mount, give him this scarf,
   These gloves too, and his signet, which, in haste,
   He left behind.

 Giving them to him .
   He has forbidden me to follow him,
   And he must be obeyed.

Diego.
                                            He shall receive them.

Leo.
   How look'd Antonio when they led him forth?
   Greatly dejected?

Diego.
                                            No; he bears it stoutly.

Leo.
   Asserting still that he is innocent?

Diego.
   Ay, ay; but every villain does the same.
   Does not my lord believe that he is guilty?

Leo.
   I cannot doubt it. When he left the chapel
   A long time in his chamber he remain'd;
   When he came forth again, I watch'd his eye,
   And it was calm, though gloomy. Then forthwith
   He gave his orders that a band of spearmen
   Should be in readiness to guard the prisoner
   Bound to Zamora; and were he in doubt,
   He were not now so calm, being before
   So greatly agitated. Hie thee quickly.


 Exeunt severally .
ACT V. SCENE I.
The court at Zamora, a grand hall of audience. Nobles, prelates, officers, &c. discovered in waiting; a flourish of trumpets. Enter the King and his train, who walks slowly, as he receives their homage, to a chair of state near the front of the stage.
 noble

 presenting a petition .
   May't please your highness, look on this petition,
   Humbly presented to your royal notice
   By one of noble blood.

King.
   And noble conduct, too, I hope, Don Pedro.
   What is its plea?

 After reading the paper slightly .
   That he beneath a lady's window hath
   A most audacious suitor slain, who there
   Did charm her ear with love-sick ditties.—Slew him!
   A harsh device to win the lady's favour;
   Had she not ears to be again enthrall'd?
   Another song had been a fitter weapon
   Of opposition than a sword, methinks.

 Giving the paper to a secretary .
   Note down that I will look on this again.

 d noble

 giving a paper .
   Deign, royal sir, to look upon this paper.

King.
   Freely, Don Blas; from such a noble hand
   It needs must be an honourable suit.

 Reading the paper .
   Don Julian, of the noble house of Guzman,
   Hath, by the cadet of a meaner house,
   Been elbow'd from his place, who most nefariously
   Refused to yield to him the dexter side.

 Reading on more slightly .
   Honour repair'd—that he be forced—a blow!

 Shaking his head .
   We are too learned in this ancient kingdom.
   Nay, reverend prelate, no offence to you;
   The clergy stand acquitted of this charge.

Prelate.
   I know not how to comprehend your highness.

King.
   We should be spared full many a deadly broil,
   Did we not know our right hand from our left.
   We are in this, good sooth! too nicely learn'd,
   Which doth but scantily, in my opinion,
   Supply the want of every other lore.

 d noble

 aside to  st .
   Never may I again i' th' royal presence
   Wear hat and plume, if this is not derision.

 noble

 aside .
   'Tis Don Henriquez we may thank for this.
   He spoke not to us thus when the arm'd Moor
   Was nearer to his doors.

King

 to prelate .
   And now, my lord, let me receive your paper.

Prelate.
   Most humbly to your highness I present it,
   From pious men, whose prayers are offer'd up
   For your prosperity.


 Gives the paper .
King

 reading it slightly .
   “That the free hinds of Tormes and their wives
   Refuse their wonted offerings to the convent,
   And therefore humbly—the adjoining lands—
   A royal compensation.”—So it runs,
   And it must cost me many a fruitful field,
   Because those villagers love fatted pullets,
   As well as sober, self-denying monks!
   This also at our leisure we'll consider.

 Gives the paper to the secretary, and sitting down, receives other petitions, when a confused noise is heard .
   What noise is that without?


Enter an Officer.
Offi.
   May't please you, Don Henriquez waits without.

King.
   Henriquez, my brave general? How is this?

Offi.
   He comes attended by a goodly train,
   Guarding a prisoner, and humbly begs
   To be admitted to the royal presence,
   Before your court shall sit.

King.
   Most willingly: say, I am ready now
   To give him audience.

 Exit officer .
                                            I marvel much
   How it should be. In this unwonted form
   To bring his prisoner!—But here he comes.



 

Enter Henriquez , followed by Carlos and Antonio , going up to the King, who rises to meet him .
King.
   Thou too, my valiant friend, a suitor here?

Hen.
   A humble supplicant.

King.
                                            Who needs not sue.
   Say freely what thou wouldst, and it is granted.

Hen.
   But what I beg, an earnest boon, must be
   Confirm'd to me with all solemnity,
   Before I utter it.

King.
                                            A strange request!
   But that thy services have been to me
   Beyond all recompense, and that I know
   Thy country's welfare and thy sovereign's honour
   Are dear to thee, as thou full well hast proved,
   I should with some precaution give my word.
   But be it so; I say thy suit is granted.

Hen.
   Nay, swear it on this sword.

King.
   Where doth this tend? Doubtst thou my royal word?

Hen.
   When honour'd lately by your princely presence,
   You gave to me this ring with words of favour;
   And said if I should e'er, by fortune press'd,
   Return the same to you, whatever grace
   I then might ask, should be conceded to me.

 Giving the ring .
   Receive your royal token: my request
   Is that you swear upon my sword to grant
   This boon which I shall beg.


 Holds out his sword to the King, who lays his hand on it .
King.
   This sword, this honour'd blade, I know it well,
   Which thou in battle from the princely Moor
   So valiantly didst win: why should I shrink
   From any oath that shall be sworn on this?
   I swear, by the firm honour of a soldier,
   To grant thy boon, whatever it may be.
   Declare it then, Henriquez.

 A pause .
                                            Thou art pale
   And silent too: I wait upon thy words.

Hen.
   My breath forsook me. 'Tis a passing weakness:
   I have power now. There is a criminal,
   Whose guilt before your highness in due form
   Shall shortly be attested; and my boon
   Is, that your highness will not pardon him
   However strongly you may be inclined
   To royal clemency,—however strongly
   Entreated so to do.

King.
   This much amazes me. Ever till now,
   Thou'st been inclined to mercy, not to blood.

Hen.
   Yea; but this criminal, with selfish cruelty,
   With black ingratitude, with base disloyalty
   To all that sacred is in virtuous ties,
   Knitting man's heart to man—What shall I say?
   I have no room to breathe.

 Tearing open his doublet with violence .
                                            He had a friend,
   Ingenuous, faithful, generous, and noble:
   E'en but to look on him had been full warrant
   Against th' accusing tongue of man or angel,
   To all the world beside,—and yet he slew him.
   A friend whose fost'ring love had been the stay,
   The guide, the solace of his wayward youth,—
   Love steady, tried, unwearied,—yet he slew him.
   A friend, who in his best devoted thoughts,
   His happiness on earth, his bliss in heaven,
   Intwined his image, and could nought devise
   Of sep'rate good,—and yet he basely slew him;
   Rush'd on him like a ruffian in the dark,
   And thrust him forth from life, from light, from nature,
   Unwitting, unprepared for th' awful change
   Death brings to all. This act so foul, so damned,
   This he hath done: therefore upon his head
   Let fall the law's unmitigated justice.

King.
   And wherefore doubtst thou that from such a man
   I will withhold all grace? Were he my brother
   I would not pardon him. Produce your criminal.


 Those who have Antonio in custody lead him forward .
Hen.

 motioning with his hand to forbid them .
   Undo his shackles; he is innocent.

King.
   What meaneth this? Produce your criminal.

Hen.

 kneeling .
   My royal master, he is at your feet.


 A cry of astonishment is heard through the hall; the King, staggering back from the spot, is supported by an attendant, while Carlos and Antonio , now free from his fetters, run to Henriquez , who continues kneeling, and bend over him in deep concern .
King

 recovering .
   A fearful shock! Mine ears are ringing still.
   Rise, Don Henriquez d'Altavera, rise!

 Turning away his head .
   Raise him: O do not let me see him thus!


 Motions the crowd to withdraw, who go off, leaving the King , Henriquez, Carlos , and Antonio only on the stage .
King

 fiercely .
   Carlos, on thee my anger rests, who thus
   Stoodst by and suffer'dst me to be deceived.

Car.
   Condemn me not, my liege; I was myself,
   Convinced this youth had done the deed, deceived.
   This on a soldier's honour I aver.

King.
   Alas, Henriquez! thou hast practised on me
   With cruel guile. I would right gladly forfeit
   The fairest town thy sword e'er won for me,
   And be again at liberty to pardon
   Whatever thou hast done: a deed, most surely,
   By thy high nature all too rudely charged.
   Thou in the frenzy of some headlong passion
   Hast acted as a madman, who still wreaks
   His direst wrath on those he loves the most.

Hen.
   No, no! it was an act of brooding thought,


 
   Of slow intent, of dark consideration.
   Our early love, with all his fair endowments
   And noble qualities, before my mind
   Did clearly pass; pass and return again,
   And strongly plead for him, and were rejected.

King.
   Go to! thou hast a wild imagination,
   Which has o'erreach'd thy judgment.—Set me free.
   The public weal requires thy service: oaths
   Adverse to this do not, and should not, bind.

Hen.
   There are within your kingdom many chiefs
   Who may do better service to the state,
   Though not with better will than I have done;

 Laying his sword at the King's feet .
   Here do I part with ensigns, arms, and war;
   Nor soldier's brand, nor baton of command,
   This hand accursed shall ever grasp again.
   Your highness by the honour of a prince
   Stands bound to me in this, and you are bound.

King.
   Ay, if it needs must be, determined spirit!
   Yet, think again; be it awhile deferr'd,
   This dismal trial, for a month—a year.

Hen.
   Not for a day.

King.
                                            Thou art too boldly stubborn.
   By what authority dost thou oppose it,
   If 'tis my pleasure it should be deferr'd?

Hen.
   The law's authority emboldens me.
   I am Don Juan's heir, and do by right
   Demand the speedy trial of his murderer.
   Nor think the law's delay would aught avail.
   How many secret ways there may be found
   To rid a wretch of life, who loathes to live.
   My soul demands this sacrifice—pants for it,
   As that which can alone restore to it
   The grace of heav'n and the respect of men.

Car.
   Noble Henriquez, thy too stubborn virtue—

Hen.
   Nay, Carlos, hold thy peace. Be not my foe:
   He were my greatest enemy who should
   Impede this consummation. When 'tis past,
   Then let the favour of my princely master,
   Of loving camp-mates, and all virtuous men,
   Return to me again. A noble treasure
   That will redeem my memory from shame.

King

 embracing him .
   Living or dead, brave man, thou must be honour'd!
   I will no more contend with thy desires.
   Some preparation for this solemn ceremony
   Thou wilt require; Don Carlos will conduct thee
   Where thou mayst rest and find all needful aid.


 Exit .
Hen.
   Come, friends, till I am summon'd to my trial:
   The time is short, and we must husband it.

 Going and stopping again .
   I shun not now thy friendly aid, good Carlos;
   My heart is lighten'd of its heavy load,
   And I can take a good man by the hand,
   And feel we are akin.

Car.
   To all that is most great and admirable
   Thou art akin. I have no words to speak
   The thoughts I have of thee, thou noble man!

Hen.

 to Antonio .
   And thou too, gentle youth; give me thy hand.
   Thy noble confidence did point to me
   The true and honour'd path. For, hadst thou fled,
   I might have shrunk aside, and been on earth
   A sullen secret thing of wretchedness,
   Cursing the light of heaven. Gentle youth,
   I've felt the kindly pressure of thy hand,
   And all thy gen'rous sympathy: forgive me,
   That I did hold thy mind so long in doubt.

Ant.
   O nothing did I doubt that thou didst know
   My innocence, and would protect it; yet,
   This noble, terrible act I ne'er divined.
   Would I had fled my prison at thy bidding,
   And lived a vagabond upon the earth,
   Ere this had been! What was my name or worth?
   But thou—

Hen.
                                            Cease, cease! repent it not, sweet youth;
   For all the friends on earth would not have done me
   Such true and worthy service!


 Exeunt .
SCENE II.
A royal apartment. Enter Leonora and Friar.
Friar.
   The king will from his council come ere long;
   Then wait, I pray, and take a little respite
   From this impatient fever of your mind.

Leo.
   Take respite! this impatience! O, good father!
   Thou canst not know this agony, and speakst
   Like one secured from human misery.
   Heaven grant me patience! I have need of it;
   But it must come from heaven.

Friar.
   See; now his highness enters.


Enter King attended; and Leonora , running to him, casts herself at his feet, embracing his knees .
King.
   The lady Leonora! rise, dear lady.

Leo.
   No; to your knees I'll cling, nor quit my hold
   Till from your royal pity I obtain
   The mercy I implore.—My lord Henriquez—
   Your valiant general—my dear, dear husband—
   Say that he shall not die. This execution!
   This malefactor's end! O save him! save him!

King

 raising her .
   As far as I have power, your suit is granted.

Leo.
   Then he is saved—he lives? Is it not so?

King.
   Alas! I would it were. Your lord refuses
   All royal mercy. I have sworn to him
   Never to pardon Juan's murderer.
   If thou canst move his stubborn spirit, kneel,
   And at his feet implore him to release me
   From this most fatal oath.



 
Leo.
   Move him! Alas, alas! this will not be;
   I know him well: in what he deems the right,
   He is inflexible. But solemn oaths,
   E'en oaths upon the holy relics sworn,
   The holy church annuls: it will release you.
   Then say not you are bound.

King.
   From oaths upon the holy relics sworn
   The church can loose, as thou, no doubt, hast learnt
   From sacred books and this good father's lore;
   But, solemnly, upon Henriquez' sword
   I've pledged a prince's word—a soldier's honour,
   From which nought can release me, but the will
   And free consent of him to whom 'tis pledged.
   Hie, therefore, to thy lord: kneel at his feet,
   And may heav'n give thee power to touch his heart.

Leo.
   Is all my hope in this! Unhappy woman!
   By heaven and man abandon'd—Dismal doom!
   The woe of desperation!

 Franticly wringing her hands, and then turning in anger to the King .
   There's mockery in this. Thou art a king,
   And canst command what I would beg in vain;
   Command him, as his royal liege and master,
   That he release thee from this fatal pledge.
   A king, and not obey'd! deceitful shadow!
   Doth not thy power o'er all things reign supreme?

King.
   Not o'er men's wills.—
   This is a power heaven to itself retains,
   And ne'er did delegate to mortal being.

Leo.

 pacing about as before .
   Despair, despair!
   What see I but despair,
   Shame, infamy, a malefactor's end?

King.
   Wring not thy hands so wildly, wretched lady!
   His life, indeed, we must despair to save;
   But infamy is from his name remov'd,
   As heaven from hell. Yea, his proud house shall boast
   Of this its noble malefactor, more
   Than all its trophied chiefs.
   When at the bar he stood arraign'd, and pled,
   Proving his secret guilt, against himself,
   Ne'er rose his form so nobly on the mind,
   Even in his days of triumph.—
   But when the fatal sentence was pronounced,
   He raised his head, and sent a look to heav'n
   Of pleased appeal and solemn thankfulness;
   A look of pious hope so dignified,
   He seem'd like some fall'n seraph that again
   Had won his way to bliss.—A general murmur
   Of admiration from deep silence rose.
   Old men did clasp their hands, and young men wept;
   And those who on his victories bestow'd
   A cold and niggard praise, now, with full hearts,
   Gave boundless tribute to his lofty virtue.

Leo.
   And he was honour'd thus! high heaven be prais'd!

 Bursting into tears .
   It makes me weep that they did weep for him.
   Heaven's will be done!
   I've been too stern and violent in my grief:
   God grant me more submission to His will,
   And I will learn to bear it. My Henriquez!
   The brave with tears of admiration grace
   Thy hapless end, and rescue thee from shame.

King.
   Rescue! far more than rescue: his proud house
   The very implements of execution
   Will henceforth in their banners proudly weave.

Leo.
   I needs must weep; but let my tears have vent,
   And I shall be resign'd.


Enter Carlos and Antonio .
King

 to them .
   How is Henriquez? came ye from his tower?

Car.
   Most admirably well; his soul is up:
   I left him shaking hands most cordially
   With his worst enemy, and he intends,
   Ere close the night's first watch, to spend an hour
   In social converse with some early friends,
   Who shared his first campaigns, and have desired
   To see his face once more.—
   His soul seems open'd now, and raised above
   That close reserve, which was his greatest blemish.

King.
   Some noble minds do from misfortune rise,
   Yea, e'en from guilt, more noble than before;
   As by the hardest blow the smitten ball
   Bounds highest from the earth.—
   Retire, fair Leonora: this good man

 pointing to friar 
   Will heavenly comfort to thy soul impart,
   And strengthen it to bear the coming trial.


 Friar supports her on one side, while Antonio offers his aid also, as she goes off .
Leo.

 to Ant .
   Not thou; the hidden cause of all this woe.

Friar.
   Nay, daughter, be not angry with this youth.
   The will of heaven must be; the means appointed
   Must also be: he is most innocent,
   Since ignorant of ill.

Leo.
   My grief is wayward still; but I'll subdue it.


 Takes hold of Antonio , and exit with him and friar, while King , Carlos , and attendants go out by another door .
SCENE III.
Before the gate of the prison; the stage dark, excepting a lamp hung over the gate; sentinels discovered on watch.

Enter Balthazar with a dark lantern .
 st sen.
   Stand! who art thou?

Bal.
   A friend, connected with the noble prisoner.



 
Sen.
   Stand there aloof; thou mayst not enter yet.


Enter Friar by the opposite side.
 st sen.
   Ho there!

Friar.
                                            A friend.

 d sen.
   A friend! What seekst thou here?

Friar.
   I am a priest, confessor to Henriquez.

 st sen.
   Thou shalt have entrance presently.

Friar.
   I thank thee.

 Going up close to Bal .
   Thou art Balthazar?

Bal.
                                            And thy servant, father.

Friar.
   Thou'rt up betimes; it is still pitchy night.

Bal.
   Nay; look thou eastward; you dull line of light,
   Bounding the sable darkness of the earth
   From the sky's fainter gloom: it is the dawn.

Friar.
   Ha! runs the time so fast! what noise is that?

Bal.
   The hum of distant voices, and the sound
   Of preparation for the awful morn.
   As I now pass'd along, in every street
   I heard the eager citizens astir,
   While light from many a lattice gleam'd. And onward,
   As I approach'd th' appointed place, I saw
   Round the fenced spot, already gather'd, groups
   Of men and women, young and old, whose faces
   Did seem, from darkness, as from nothing sprung,
   Touch'd with the torches' glaring light, which downward
   Stream'd from the lofty scaffold, whereon forms
   Of busy artists at their fatal work,
   And ghastly headsmen moving to and fro,
   Appear'd like blacken'd fiends. Dost thou not hear
   The stroke of hammers, and that sounding plank?
   There comes a strange and thrilling coldness o'er me.

 A pause and noise without .
   I little thought to feel such ruth for him,
   The man who slew my good and noble master.

Friar.
   Why shouldst thou not? the feeling does thee honour;
   And he doth for that rash and rueful deed
   Make dear and great amends. The gate is open'd.


 Exeunt into the prison .
SCENE IV.
A passage way in the prison. Enter Friar and Gaoler, speaking as they enter.
Gaoler.
   But it is past the hour; he must be waked.

Friar.
   Waked! dost thou think he sleeps?

Gaoler.
   Yes, father; he hath slept, I guess, since midnight.

Friar.
   How knowst thou this?

Gaoler.
                                            I've listen'd at his door
   From time to time, and nought have heard within
   But a deep silence, once or twice brok'n faintly
   By slow-heaved breathings, as of heavy sleep.

Friar.
   So sound asleep, and such a morn to wake to!

Gaoler.
   Nay, they who sleep before their day of doom
   Sleep often thus,—a deathlike, dreamless sleep.

 Speaking as he goes off .
   I well remember one, who, on the morn—


 Exeunt .
SCENE V.
The prison chamber . Henriquez discovered asleep on a couch, near the front of the stage .

Enter Friar and Gaoler.
Friar.
   Still fast asleep: it grieves my soul to wake him.
   No trace of trouble on his face! He lies
   Like a tired hunter after toilsome chase.
   Call to him, friend, I cannot.

Gaoler.
   Ho! Don Henriquez! ho, my lord! awake!
   Awake, my lord!—He is in heavy sleep,
   Like the dull rest of death, which hath no ear.

Friar.
   Oh that it were indeed the rest of death!
   It is a woeful service to awake him.
   How goes the time? Might he still sleep awhile?

Gaoler.
   'Tis past the hour at which he charged me strictly
   To call him up.

Friar.
                                            Then he must be obey'd.

Gaoler

 touching him gently .
   Wake! Don Henriquez, wake! It is the hour.
   He moves him now: the sound is in his ears;
   The light annoys his eyes. Awake, my lord!


 Touching him again .
Hen.

 raising his head .
   What is it?

Gaoler.
                                            'Tis the hour the morning breaks.

Hen.

 starting from his couch .
   Bring me my armour: have ye roused the camp?
   Bid every soldier dight him for the field:
   I've slept too long.

Gaoler.
   It is the very hour
   At which you did give orders to be waked.

Hen.
   Ha! Yes, I understand thee: it is morn,—
   The fated morn that brings to me no noon.
   Sleep from the tablet of my brain had razed
   All present things, and in my waking fancy
   Had led me back to what I was so lately.
   I thank you. Dawns the light?

Friar and Gaoler

 both at once .
   The morning breaks.

Hen.
   Your voices sound like midnight, not like morn.
   Welcome, good father; thou art come, in truth,
   To wake me for the fight, and brace my strength,
   Not with corporeal arms.

Friar.
                                            No, good my lord;
   A nobler armour, for a nobler warfare:


 
   And the Almighty King, whose valiant soldier
   Thou wilt this day approve thyself to be,
   Will gird thee for the field. Receive from him
   His high commission, worthy of a man.

Hen.

 looking upward, and then kneeling with his arms on his breast, and his head bowed to the ground .
   I do receive it, father, most devoutly.

 Rising with solemnity .
   Let me be forward in my work, good father.
   I would retire, and give my thoughts to heaven
   Ere earthly things shall press to mingle with them.
   Come, then, and join thy fervent prayers with mine,
   And teach my dying voice to sue for mercy.


 Exit with friar .
Gaoler

 looking after Henriquez .
   The right true metal this; 'twill bear the furnace.
   Ah! who would once have thought that from my custody
   He should pass forth to such a death? Heaven doom'd it.

 Noise and bustle without .
   What noise is that without?—Ho! who would enter?

Voice

 without .
   Open; it is the king.


 Gaoler opens the door, and enter the King , Carlos, Antonio , and Balthazar .
King

 to gaoler .
   Where is thy noble charge?

Gaoler.
   With his confessor, in the private chapel.

King.
   How is he, gaoler? Has he through the night
   Had any rest?

Gaoler.
                                            Yes, may it please your highness,
   He hath slept soundly.

King.
   Sound sleep in such a state! Yet, wherefore marvel:
   He has been used to look death i' the face.

Car.
   Ay, in the field; but many brave him there,
   Who on a scaffold feel their manhood quail.

King.
   Is it so, gaoler? Thou hast good experience.

Gaoler.
   Some years ago, two brothers suffer'd here,
   For an offence of state; the one a soldier,
   Stout, brave, and bold in war; the other bred
   To quiet life at home; but on the scaffold
   The man of peace did bear the loftier brow,
   And beat the hardy vet'ran shamefully.

King.
   Strange creatures are we all! and who is known
   Until his trial comes?—I think, good Carlos
   Thou toldst me he conversed with cheerfulness
   Till a late hour last night.

Car.
                                            Yes, good my liege,
   Having first settled all his worldly cares,
   Like one, who, from a heavy load released,
   Unclasps his vest to recreate himself,
   He with two ancient camp-mates and your liegeman
   Convers'd with kindlier, more enliven'd freedom
   Than he was wont: spoke of their old adventures,
   Prais'd many a valiant heart, fall'n in the field,
   And of the fate of others did inquire
   With kindly interest, as though his soul
   Upon the very parting verge of nature
   Felt nature's sympathies more warmly. Truly
   His spirit seem'd already to have doff'd
   Its earthly coat, and gain'd a purer being.

King.
   Ay; he is passing to a higher state:
   So teach our holy men, and I believe them.
   Doth aught approaching to a final end
   Of dark extinction rise to meet it thus?
   It doth not;—no, it cannot.
   But first he settled all his worldly cares.
   And what are his bequests?

Car.
   Balthazar, thou canst tell.

Bal.
   He first of all provides a noble monument
   To Juan's mem'ry near his native town,
   Desiring he himself may be interr'd
   In the same vault with him, and by his side.
   For many friends, and all his ancient servants,
   Forgetting none, he hath made kind provision.
   His lady's dowry is enlarg'd, and Mencia
   Receives a noble portion to bestow
   Upon her early lover, this good youth,
   Whom he hath named with words of special love.

King

 to Antonio , who turns aside to weep. 
   Weep freely, gentle youth; whom he hath loved
   Shall ever in his prince's favour hold
   An honourable place.—Pray thee, proceed.

Bal.
   He hath, besides, for good and pious ends,
   A large benevolence—

Car.
                                            Hush! he approaches.


Re-enter Henriquez and Friar .
King

 advancing to meet him .
   My noble friend, I felt a strong desire
   Once more—a short intrusion.

Hen.
                                            Say not so.
   Your grace is come to wish me a good morrow,
   And cheer me on this outset of my way.

King.
   Alas! a dismal cheer, a woful morrow!

Hen.
   Nay, three successive days have dawn'd upon me
   Through such a gloom of hopeless misery,
   That this, comparatively, seems indeed
   A morn of cheer. Then so consider it.
   And now, in parting, I would beg of you
   To pardon whatsoe'er, in my long service,
   I've done, in ignorance or stubborn will,
   To prejudice the service of the state,
   Or to offend your grace. Once at Cuenca
   I rashly hazarded some brave men's lives;
   And, for th' unmeaning triumph of a day,
   Those brave men's lives were lost. My heart for this
   Has suffer'd many a pang; but pride till now
   Restrain'd confession. Pardon me for this.



 
King.
   Thou needst from me no pardon; yet thou hast it,
   And with it, too, my thanks,—my solemn thanks,
   For all the noble service thou hast done me.
   And is there no request thou hast to make?

Hen.
   Yes, if I might presume. Here is a list

 Giving the King a paper.
   Of some brave officers, whose worthy services
   Deserve promotion: let them, for my sake,
   Find favour with your grace. This is my suit.

King.
   It shall be done. Oh that a suit of mine
   Could, in return, move thine obdurate bosom!

Hen.
   What is't, my gracious master?

King.
   If I have been to thee a gracious master,
   Be thou a gracious liegeman, and restore—
   Restore to me that honour of my reign,
   That pride, and fence, and bulwark of my land,—
   Restore to me again my gallant general,
   Henriquez d'Altavera.

Hen.
   Alphonso of Castile, I've serv'd thee long,—
   Yea, though I say it, I have served thee bravely.
   Have I from fire, or flood, or havoc shrunk?
   What battle have I lost, what town abandon'd,
   That now I may not, like a noble Spaniard,
   My earthly station quit, from insult spared?
   I've owed you service as my rightful king;
   I've owed you service as my gracious master:
   But not for man on earth, nor saint in heaven,
   Would I submit a loathed life to live,
   After the horrid deed that I have done.

Friar

 laying his hand gently on Henriquez .
   My son, my son! where is the Christian meekness,
   Which, at the Throne of Grace, some moments since,
   Thou didst devoutly pray for?

Hen.
   Father, I am reproved: my mortal frailty
   Was smother'd, not extinct.

 Turning to the King.
   I will not, standing on this awful verge,
   To mortal greatness bend, else on my knees
   I'd crave forgiveness of this new offence:

 Laying his hand sorrowfully on his breast.
   An unrein'd mind, offending to the last!


 The King rushes into his arms and embraces him; then turns away, retiring to the bottom of the stage, to conceal strong emotion.
Hen.
   Carlos, thou wilt not leave me till the end;
   But thou'lt forgive me now the many wrongs
   I've done thine honest worth, fastidiously
   Bestowing confidence on one alone.
 Taking his hand affectionately.

 Turning to Antonio .

   And thou, brave youth, I know thy gen'rous soul.
   Though I have held thee long in doubt, I trust
   Thou partst with me in charity.

Ant.

 catching his hands, and kissing them fervently .
   In love,
   In deepest admiration, in devotion
   That for thy sake would make me welcome death,
   Yea, suffer shame, or be an outlaw'd wretch,
   Cast off from all my kind.

Hen.
   Come to my heart! think of me when I'm gone;
   And be my fate thy warning. For I see
   Keen passions and affections in thy nature,
   Akin to those I felt in early youth.
   And when thou thinkst of me, consider this:
   The law condemneth not a man unheard,
   Be he the veriest wretch upon the earth:
   But I condemn'd my dearest friend unheard.
   Balthazar, thou dost know how very dear—
   No, no! thou couldst not know how well I loved him.
   Farewell, good secretary, and be sure
   Thou mind thy charge. See that it be erected
   With strength and skill; a noble monument,
   That will resist the silent strokes of time.

 Looking round. 
   Where is my ancient servant, good Diego?
   How is it that I do not see him here?

Bal.
   On learning that your sentence was pronounced,
   He took his bed; and whether violent grief
   Or other means did speed his end, I know not:
   He died last night.

Hen.
   Then I shall meet him shortly, where the servant,
   Freed from his master, fears his wrath no more.
   My poor Diego! he did live with me
   In too much awe: and yet he loved me well.
   I was to blame in this.


Enter Leonora and Mencia .
Car.
                                            Thy Leonora comes.

Hen.
   Ah! would she had been spared this dismal parting!

Car.
   She would not be restrain'd.

Hen.
   My Leonora, wherefore art thou come?
   Yet thou art welcome to my heart once more.
   Farewell in love,—in true, in most dear love,
   My dearest wife!

Leo.
                                            Oh no! thy cruel wife,
   The cause of all thy misery,—thy bane.

Hen.

 embracing her .
   Hush, hush! thou wast my torment and my bliss,
   But O! far more my bliss! So be content.
   I have had many days of prosperous life
   Before this storm of misery broke upon me,
   Thy love the flower and crown of all. Be comforted!
   And Mencia, too, sweet maid, I understand
   Thy mute farewell, which I accept. God bless thee!
   Antonio, take thy charge.


 Putting Mencia ' s hand in his.
   Heaven bless thee, and farewell, my dearest wifel


 
Leo.
   Not yet, not yet! my swelling heart will burst.
   It tries to utter what it cannot.—Oh!


 A bell tolls, and she, giving a loud shriek, falls into the arms of Mencia and Antonio .
Hen.
   Bear her away; I may not look again!


 As she is borne off, the King advances to the front.
King.
   Farewell, thou noble man! Part we in charity?

Hen.
   In charity; and on your royal head
   My dying blessing rest!

 Exit King.
                                            Here comes the marshal.
Enter Marshal and other officers.


 To the marshal. 
   Are all things ready, then?
 The marshal bows.

 To Carlos and friar. 

   My faithful friends,
   Who still cling to my latest throb of life,
   I claim of you a kind but painful service!


 He begins to move, the friar walking by his side, and Carlos following, while the bell tolls, and a large door in the centre of the back scene being thrown open, discovers a grand arched passage, lined with guards and other public officers, who, as he passes along, join the procession. The curtain drops.


THE BRIDE: A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.

 

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Rasinga.

Samarkoon , his brother-in-law.

Juan de Creda , a Spanish physician.

Samar , a child, and son of Rasinga.

Ehleypoolie , officer of Rasinga.

Mihdoony , officer of Rasinga.

Officers, domestics, robbers, spearmen, &c.

WOMEN Artina , wife of Rasinga , and sister of Samarkoon.

Montebesa , mother of Rasinga.

The Bride.

Sabawatté.

Nurse, attendants, &c.



Scene, in Ceylon.


 
ACT I. SCENE I.
Before the castle of Rasinga. Enter Ehleypoolie , meeting Mihdoony and two officers of the chieftain's household.
Ehley.
   Well met, my comrades! I have words for you.

Mih.
   We doubt it not; thou'rt bountiful in words.

 st offi.
   Thou never wast a niggard of such treasure.

Ehley.
   Ay, but the words which ye shall now receive,
   Are not the passing ware of daily traffic,
   But such as in each list'ner's fancy wakes
   Responding sounds, such, as from twisted shell
   On sea-beach found, comes to the bended ear
   Of wand'ring child; sounds strange and full of omen.

Mih.
   What! evil omen? storms and hurricanes?

Ehley.
   Fy on't! A stirring, tinkling, hopeful sound:
   The ring of scatter'd largess, sweeter far
   Than pipe, or chord, or chant of forest birds:
   The sound of mummery and merriment:
   The sound—
                                            But wherefore stare ye on me thus?
   List: I will tell you what concerns us all.

Mih.
   Out with it then! for it concerns us all
   To be no more tormented with thy folly.

Ehley.
   Our Lord Rasinga wills, that we, brave mates,
   With fifty armed followers and their followers,
   Shall be in readiness by early dawn,
   To march in goodly order to the mountains.

 st offi.
   I like not mountain warfare.

 d offi.
   No, nor I.

Mih.
   To force our toilsome way through thick rank woods,
   With bleeding limbs drained by a hundred leeches! 

Ehley.
   Fy, lazy cowards! shrink ye from adventures
   Which gentle lady, in her palanquin,
   Will share with you?

Mih.
   A gentle lady, sayst thou?

Ehley.
   Yes, ye dull dolts, I say so.—Brave Rasinga
   Has with one wife, for a good term of years,
   Lulled by some charm of sorcery been satisfied.
   It is good time that he, like other chiefs,
   Should have a first sultana and a second,
   Or any such arrangement as becomes
   His age and dignity. So, in gay trim
   With our arm'd band, we by to-morrow's dawn
   Must be in readiness.—These are your orders,
   Sent by our lord through me.

Mih.
   Who is this honour'd lady of the mountains?

Ehley.
   Caust thou not guess?—The aged chieftain's daughter,
   Whose petty hold was sack'd by daring robbers,
   Not many weeks gone by. He and his daughter
   Were dragg'd as prisoners from their ruin'd home.
   In this sad plight, our chief, with Samarkoon,
   The valiant brother of his present wife,
   And a good strength of spearmen, met them; charged
   The bootied spoilers, conquer'd and released
   Their wretched prey.—And ye may well suppose
   The lady's veil, amidst the strange confusion,
   Could not be clutch'd so close, but that Rasinga
   Might see the lovely face it should have cover'd.

Mih.
   O now I understand it; for, methinks,
   Rasinga had not else brought to his house
   Another bride to share it with Artina.


 Samarkoon , who has entered behind them unperceived, and overheard part of the preceding dialogue, now rushes forward indignantly.
Sam.
   Ye foul-tongued knaves, who so belie your master!
   What words are these which ye have dared to utter?

Ehley.
   My lord, I crave your pardon; I have utter'd
   The orders which Rasinga charged me with,
   That these
 pointing to Mihdoony and officers 
should straight prepare an armed band
   To take their way to-morrow for the mountains.

Sam.
   To bring a bride from thence? Speak out, I charge thee,
   Thou lying knave! Went not thy words thus far?

Ehley.
   If they be true or lying words, I wot not.
   What may within a guarded palanquin
   Be from the mountains brought, I may but guess.
   Perhaps some speaking bird or jabb'ring ape.

Sam.

 striking him .
   Take that—and that—thou false audacious slave:
   Dar'st thou to answer me with mockery?
 Exit Ehleypoolie sulkily, followed by Mihdoony and officers.

Manet Samarkoon.

   Base sordid reptiles! for some paltry largess
   And passing revelry, they would right gladly


 
   See peace and order and domestic bliss
   To misery and wild confusion changed.
   Hateful suggestions! base and vague conjectures,
   That vulgar minds on slight foundation rear!
   All false!—
                                            And yet they are upon my heart
   Like the compressure of a coiled boa,
   Loathly, but irresistible.
                                            A bride!
   It cannot be!—although her unveil'd face
   Was of surprising beauty—Oh how lovely!
   Yet he bestow'd on her but frigid praise,
   And still continued to repress my ardour,
   Whene'er I spoke of the fair mountain maid,
   With silent stern reserve.—Is this like love?
   It is not natural.
                                            Ah! but it is;
   It is too natural,—deep subtle nature.
   How was my idiot soul so far beguiled
   That I ne'er thought of this?
                                            Yes, yes, he loves her!
   Loves her whom I so well—so dearly love,
   That every female image but her own
   Is from my heart effaced, like curling mists
   That, rising from the vale, cling for awhile
   To the tall cliff's brown breast, till the warm sun
   Dissolves them utterly.—'Tis so; e'en she
   Whom I have thought of, dreamt of, talk'd of,—ay,
   And talk'd to , though in absence, as a thing
   Present and conscious of my words, and living,
   Like the pure air around me, every where.

 After a pause. 
   And he must have this creature of perfection!
   It shall not be, whatever else may be!
   As there is blood and manhood in this body,
   It shall not be!
                                            And thou, my gentle sister,
   Must thy long course of wedded love and honour
   Come to such end!—Thy noble heart will break,
   When love and friendly confidence are fled.
   Thou art not form'd to sit within thy bower
   Like a dress'd idol in its carved alcove,
   A thing of silk and gems and cold repose:
   Thy keen but generous nature—Shall it be?
   I'll sooner to the trampling elephant
   Lay down this mortal frame, than see thee wrong'd.

 After a considerable pause. 
   Nay, nay! I am a madman in my rage.
   The words of that base varlet may be false.
   Good Montebesa shall resolve my doubts.
   Her son confides to her his secret thoughts:
   To her I'll go, and be relieved from torment,
   Or know the worst at once.


 Exit.
SCENE II.
The apartment of Montebesa.

Sabawatté is discovered at work and singing.
SONG.
   The gliding fish that takes his play
      In shady nook of streamlet cool,
   Thinks not how waters pass away,
      And summer dries the pool.

   The bird beneath his leafy dome,
      Who trills his carol, loud and clear,
   Thinks not how soon his verdant home
      The lightning's breath may sear.

   Shall I within my bridegroom's bower,
      With braids of budding roses twined,
   Look forward to a coming hour
      When he may prove unkind?

   The bee reigns in his waxen cell,
      The chieftain in his stately hold,
   To-morrow's earthquake,—who can tell?
      May both in ruin fold.

Enter Montebesa , as the song is concluded.
Mont.
   Did I not hear thee singing, as I came,
   The song my dear Artina loves to hear?

Sab.
   E'en so, good lady; many a time I sang it
   When first I was attendant in her bower;
   Ere, at your own desire, and for my honour,
   She did resign me to your higher service.

Mont.
   Sing it no more: alas! she thought not then
   Of its contain'd allusions to a fate
   Which now abides herself.

Sab.
   No, not her fate; you surely mean not so:
   She is a happy wife, the only wife
   Of brave Rasinga, honour'd and beloved.

Mont.
   She was and is as yet his only wife.

Sab.
   As yet his only wife! and think you then
   She will not so continue?

Mont.
                                            Sabawatté,
   It grieves me much to tell thee what perforce
   Must soon be known to all; my son Rasinga
   Hath set his heart upon a younger bride,
   Perhaps a fairer too.

Sab.

 eagerly .
                                            No; not a fairer.
   I'd peril life and limb upon the bet,
   She is not half so fair, nor half so good.

Mont.
   Be not so hasty.—Why dost thou regard it
   As such a grievous thing? She has already
   Enjoy'd his undivided love much longer
   Than other dames have done with other lords,
   And reason teaches she should now give place.

Sab.
   Reason and cruelty sort ill together;
   A loorie haunting with a spotted pard.
   Ah! woe the day! Why have you told me this?

Mont.
   Because I would upon your sadden'd brow


 
   Print traces that may lead our poor Artina
   To question thee; and thou, who art her friend,
   Canst by degrees, with gentle, wise precaution,
   Reveal to her what she must needs be told.

Sab.
   I cannot: put not such a task on me,
   I do implore your goodness!—No, I cannot.

Mont.
   Hush, hush! I hear the footsteps of a man,
   But not Rasinga.—It is Samarkoon;
   I know his rapid tread.—Be wise; be silent;
   For he awhile must live in ignorance.
Enter Samarkoon , and Sabawatté retires to some distance.

   A happy morning to you, youthful kinsman!

Sam.
   As it may prove, good lady: happy morning
   Oft leads to woeful eve, ay, woeful noon.

Mont.
   These are strange sombre words; what is the matter?
   Why dost thou look both sorrowful and stern?

Sam.
   I have good cause, if that which I have heard
   Be aught but a malignant, hateful tale,
   On mere conjecture founded. Answer me,
   If thou knowst nothing of a num'rous train
   In preparation, by Rasinga's orders,
   To fetch home to his house a fair young bride?
   There's no such thing.—Speak—speak! I will believe thee;
   For if to thee unknown, there's no such thing.—

 A pause, he looking inquisitively in her face.
   Thou dost not speak; thou dost not answer me;
   There's trouble in thine eye.—A with'ring curse
   Light on his heartless heart, if this be true!

Mont.
   Brave Samarkoon! thou art not wise, so fiercely
   To question me of that which well may be
   Without my knowledge;—that which, if it be,
   Nor thou nor I have any power to alter.

Sam.
   Which if it be! that if betrays an answer;
   A shameful answer, shunning open words.
   Dear, dear Artina! thou hast climb'd already
   The sunny side of Doombra's mountain ridge 
   And now with one short step must pass the bounds
   Dividing ardent heat from chilling clouds
   With drenching mist surcharged.
                                            So suddenly
   To bring this change upon her! Cruel craft!
   He knows that it will break her tender heart,
   And serve his fatal purpose.

Mont.
                                            Frantic man!
   Thou art unjust, ungenerous, unwise;
   For should Rasinga—no uncommon act,
   Take to his princely bower a second bride,
   Would not Artina still be held in honour,
   Her children cherish'd, and their rank secured?

Sam.
   Such honour as unfeeling worldlings give
   To fall'n deserted merit, she will have;
   And such security as should-be heirs,
   Who stand i' the way of younger, petted minions,
   Find in the house of an estranged sire,
   Her children will receive. Alas, alas!
   The very bonds of soul-devoted love,
   That did so long entwine a husband's heart,
   For her own life the cord of execution
   Will surely prove. Detested cruelty!
   But is it so? My head is all confusion,
   My heart all fire;—I know not what thou saidst.

Mont.
   Indeed, young kinsman, thou art now unfit
   To hold discourse on such a wayward subject.
   She whom thou lovst so dearly as a brother,
   I as a mother do most truly love.
   Let this suffice thee, and retire awhile,
   For I expect Artina, and 'tis meet
   She be not now o'erwhelm'd with thy distress.
   Ha! she is here already; tripping lightly
   With sparkling eyes, like any happy child,
   Who bears away the new-robb'd rock-bird's spoil.


Enter Artina , gaily, with an embroidered scarf of many colours in her hand, and running up to Montebesa.
Art.
   Dear mother, look at this! such tints, such flowers!
   The spirits of the Peak have done this work;
   Not hands of flesh and blood. Nay, look more closely.
   And thou too, Samarkoon. How cam'st thou here?
   I pray you both admire the beauteous gift—
   Rasinga's gift—which I have just received.

Sam.

 eagerly .
   Received from his own hand, so lately too?

Art.
   E'en now. But did I say, from his own hand?
   He sent it to me, the capricious man!
   Ay, and another present, some days since,
   Was also sent. Ay, so it was indeed.

Sam.
   Was he not wont to bring such gifts himself?

Art.
   With what a face of gravity thou askst
   This most important question! Never mind:
   I can devise a means to be revenged
   For all this seeming lack of courtesy.

Mont.
   Devise a means to be revenged! and how?

Art.
   I'll dress old nurse as my ambassadress,
   With robe, and veil, and pall majestical,
   And she shall thank him in a tiresome speech,
   He hates her formal prosing—that I trow,
   Will cure him of such princely modes of sending
   His gifts to me. But ye are wondrous grave.
   What ails thee, brother? Speak, good Montebesa;
   I fear he is not well.

Mont.
                                            He is not very well.

Art.

 taking his hand affectionately .
   Indeed he is not.

Sam.

 turning away his face .
   A passing fit of fever has disturb'd me,
   But mind it not, Artina.

Art.
   Nay, nay, but I will mind it, gentle brother.


 
   And I have learnt this morning cheering news,
   Good news for thee and all sick folk beside.

Mont.
   We want good news; what is it thou hast heard?

Art.
   De Creda, who, by physic magical,
   Did cure Rasinga of his fearful malady,
   When at the point of death, is just arrived.
   Where he hath been these two long years and more,
   There's not a creature knows. Perhaps i' the moon,
   If magic knows the way to climb so high.

Mont.
   Perhaps in his own land.

Art.
   Ay, certes, Europe is a wondrous kingdom,
   And well worth visiting, which sends forth men
   So gifted and so good.

Sam.
   I pray thee say not men , but only man.
   Hath it e'er sent another like to him?
   Yet wherefore came he to these happier regions
   With such a wicked crew?

Art.
                                            Nay, blame him not:
   His fate hath been disastrous and sad,
   As I have heard him say; and, woe is me!
   Misfortune is not dainty in associates.

Sam.
   Associates! Solitude, in trackless deserts,
   Where locusts, ants, and lizards poorly thrive,—
   On the bare summit of a rugged peak,
   Where birds of prey in dusky circles wing
   The troubled air with loud and clam'rous din,
   Were to an honest heart endurable,
   Rather than such associates.

Art.
   Ha! does this rouse thee so? Yet, ne'ertheless,
   I'll send for him, and he will make thee well.

Sam.
   I'm well if thou art so, my gentle sister.

Art.
   And I am so; how canst thou doubt it, brother,
   Being so loving and so well beloved.

Sam.
   O yes! thou art indeed beloved most dearly,
   Both thee and thine, and so shall ever be,
   While life gives motion to thy brother's heart.

Art.
   A brother's heart!—How so? there is a meaning,—
   A meaning and a mystery in this.
   Tears, too, are on my hand, dropt from thine eyes;—
   O, speak, and tell the worst!

Sam.
                                            I may not now.
   I pray thee, let me go; I cannot speak.


 Breaks from her and exit. Then Sabawatté comes forward and takes hold of her robe with an action of soothing tenderness.
Art.

 to Sabawatté .
   Dost thou, too, look on me with pity? Speak;
   I charge thee speak, and tell the fearful cause,
   Since no one else will do it.

Mont.
   My dear Artina, thou shalt know the truth,
   Which can no longer be conceal'd; but listen,
   Listen with patience to the previous story,
   And thou wilt see how fated, strange events
   Have caused within Rasinga's noble heart,
   E'en he who has so long and dearly loved thee,
   A growing possibility of change.

Art.
   If he is changed, why should I know the rest?
   All is comprised in this.


 With actions of despair.
Mont.
   Nay, do not wring thy hands, but listen to me.
   Sit on this seat and call up strength to hear me.
   Thou giv'st no heed to me; thou dost not hear.

Art.

 in a low voice, after a pause .
   I'm faint and very cold; mine ears ring strangely;
   But I will try to do whate'er thou wilt.

 After another pause.
   There is a story then: I'll hear it now.

Mont.
   Rasinga, as thou knowst, did, short while since,
   A mountain chief and his fair daughter rescue
   From ruffian robbers. In its youthful charms
   He saw the virgin's unveiled face. Alas!
   A sight so rare he could not see unmoved.
   Restless and troubled, like a stricken wretch
   Whom sorcery possesses, for awhile
   He strove against his passion, but at length
   Nature gave way; and thou mayst guess what follows.

Art.
   What follows! What has followed?

Mont.
   Our gates must soon receive this youthful bride;
   And thou, dear daughter, must prepare thyself
   To bear some natural change.


 Artina faints away in the arms of Sabawatté.
Sab.
   I knew it would be so! Oh, my dear mistress!
   These cruel words have dealt the fatal blow.

Mont.
   Be not afraid of this infirmity,
   Which, though it seems appalling, brings relief,
   E'en like Niwané, when the virtuous soul 
   Hath run, through many a change, its troubled course.
   Let us remove her gently to my couch!


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
The apartments of Rasinga.

He enters, followed by Ehleypoolie and Mihdoony , and is speaking as he enters.
Ras.

 to Ehleypoolie .
   Thou hast done well.

Ehley.
   I am not given to boasting,
   Yet I must say all things are so arranged,
   That never bride's array, on such short notice,
   Was better order'd, or for gallant show,
   Or for security.

Ras.
                                            'Tis rich and splendid?

Ehley.
   Our palanquin, with all its colour'd streamers,
   Will shine above the guards' encircling heads,


 
   Like any crested mancka, proudly perch'd
   Upon the summit of her bushy knoll.

Ras.
   And have ye pioneers to clear its way?

Ehley.
   Ay, pioneers who through a tangled thicket
   Make room as quickly as the supple trunk
   Of a wild elephant; whilst forest birds,
   From their rent haunts dislodged, fly up and wheel
   In mazy circles, raising clam'rous cries,
   And casting noon-day shadows, like a cloud,
   On the green woods beneath.

Mih.
   In truth, my lord, he makes it well appear
   He is not given to boasting.

Ras.

 smiling .
                                            Not a whit!
   As meek and modest as a Padur's child.
   And having done so much for show and speed,
   Good Ehleypoolie, I will take for granted
   The chiefest point of all, security ,
   Has not been overlook'd; for mountain robbers
   May yet be lurking near some narrow pass.

Ehley.
   Well, let them lurk, and burst upon us too;
   'Twill be as though a troop of mowing monkeys,
   With antic mimic motions of defiance,
   Should front the brinded tiger and his brood.
   Full soon, I trow, their hinder parts they turn,
   Lank and unseemly, to the enemy,
   In scamp'ring haste, to gain the nearest shelter.
   It were good sport if they should dare to stand.

Mih.
   You see, my lord, he is in all things perfect.

Ras.
   I see it plainly. Thanks for all thy pains,
   Brave Ehleypoolie.

Ehley.
                                            Shall we take with us
   The pipes and doulas  that have hung so long
   In the recess of Dame Artina's garden?
   Of all your instruments there are not any
   That sound so loud and clear.

Ras.

 sternly .
                                            No, no! I charge thee,
   Let nothing there be changed. Thy witless words
   Have struck upon my heart a dismal note,
   Depressing all its life and buoyancy.
   Alas! my joy is like the shimm'ring brightness
   Of moving waves, touch'd by the half-risen moon,
   Tracing her narrow pathway on the deep:
   Between each brighten'd ridge black darkness lies,
   le far on either side, the wat'ry waste
   Spreads dim, and vague, and cheerless.

Mih.
   If such thy thoughts, dost thou repent thy purpose?

Ras.
   Not so; there's ecstacy in those bright gleams;
   Ay, and though cross'd with darkness black as midnight,
   I will enjoy this momentary radiance.
Enter a Slave, in haste.

   What brings thee here with such a staring face?

Slave.
   The lady's coming; she is close at hand.

Ras.
   Ha! from her father's house, unsent for, come?

Slave.
   No, not that lady, sir; it is Artina.

Ras.

 much disturbed .
   I thought my mother would have spared me this.
   Is Montebesa with her?

Slave.
                                            No, my lord;
   She has her children with her.

Ras.
                                            Wretched moment!
   The sight of them will change my strength to cowardice:
   What shall I do?

Ehley.
                                            I'll quickly run and say that you are busy,
   And cannot see her.

Ras.

 pulling Ehleypoolie back as he is about to go out .
   Restrain thy heartless zeal; it is most odious.
   Shall she be so debarr'd from entrance here,
   Whose presence was a blessing and a grace!
Enter Artina , leading her youngest child, and followed by Samar , leading his little sister. Rasinga hastens to meet her, and leads her in silence to the principal seat, at the same time motioning to Ehleypoolie and Mihdoony to withdraw, who immediately leave the apartment.

   Here, take this seat, Artina.

Art.
                                            No, my lord;
   I come not here to sit; I come to kneel,
   As now beseems a scorn'd forsaken wife,
   Who pleads with strong affection for her children:
   Who pleads in painful memory of love
   Which thou for many years hast lavish'd on her,
   Till, in the gladness of a foolish heart,
   She did believe that she was worthy of it.

Ras.
   Yes, dear Artina, thou wast worthy of it!
   Thou wast, and art, and shalt be loved and honour'd
   While there is life within Rasinga's bosom.
   Why didst thou think it could be otherwise,
   Although another mate within my house
   May take her place, to be with thee associated,
   As younger sister with an elder born?
   Such union is in many houses found.

Art.
   I have no skill in words—no power to reason:
   How others live I little care to know:
   But this I feel, there is no life for me,
   No love, no honour, if thy alter'd heart
   Hath put me from it for another mate.
   Oh, woe is me! these children on thy knees,
   That were so oft caress'd, so dearly cherish'd,
   Must then divide thy love with younger fav'rites,
   Of younger mother born? Alas! alas!
   Small will the portion be that falls to them.

Ras.
   Nay, say not so, Artina; say not so.

Art.
   I know it well. Thou thinkest now, belike,
   That thou wilt love them still; but ah! too soon
   They'll be as things who do but haunt thy house,
   Lacking another home, uncheer'd, uncared for


 
   And who will heed their wants, will soothe their sorrow,
   When their poor mother moulders in the grave,
   And her vex'd spirit, in some other form,
   Is on its way to gain the dreamless sleep?
   Kneel, Samar, kneel! thy father loved thee first,
   In our first happy days.—Wilt thou not, boy?
   Why dost thou stand so sullen and so still?

Sam.
   Ne loves us not.

Art.
                                            Nay, nay, but he will love us.
   Down on thy knees! up with thy clasped hands!
   Rasinga, O Rasinga! did I think
   So to implore thy pity—I and mine
   So to implore thy pity, and in vain!


 Sinks on the ground exhausted with agitation.
Ras.

 raising her gently in his arms .
                                            Dearest
   Artina! still most dear to me:
   Thy passionate affections waste thy strength;
   Let me support thee to another chamber,
   More fitting for retirement and for rest.
   Come also, children.—Come, my little playmates!

Sam.
   We're not thy playmates now.

Ras.
                                            What dost thou say?

Sam.
   Thou dost not speak and smile and sport with us
   As thou wast wont: we're not thy playmates now.

Ras.
   Thou art a fearless knave to tell me so.


 Exeunt , Artina leaning on her husband, and the children following.
SCENE IV.
A retired grove near the castle of Rasinga.

Enter Samarkoon and a forest freebooter.
Sam.
   Now, stop we here; in this sequester'd spot,
   We may with freedom commune on the purpose
   For which I would engage thy speedy aid.
   Thou knowest who I am; and dost remember
   Where, how, and when I last encounter'd thee?

Free.
   I do, my lord; but though thou findst me thus,
   Alone and slightly arm'd, be well assured
   I will defend my life and liberty,
   Against thyself
 looking suspiciously around 
or any ambush'd band,
   To the last bloody push of desperation.

Sam.
   I know thou wilt; it is thy desp'rate prowess
   That makes me now, all robber as thou art,
   And lurking here disguised, as well I guess,
   For no good end,—to seek thy amity.

Free.
   My amity! the noble Samarkoon—
   A chief of rank, and brother of Rasinga!

Sam.
   Strong passion by strong provocation roused,
   Is not a scrup'lous chooser of its means.
   How many of these armed desperadoes,
   From whose fell hands we did so lately rescue
   That petty chieftain and his child, couldst thou
   Within short time assemble?

Free.
                                            Few remain
   Of those who once, at sound of my shrill horn,
   With spear and bow in hand, and quiver'd back
   The deadly arrows bearing, issued forth
   From cave or woody jungle, fierce but stealthy,
   Like glaring, tawny pards,—few, few remain.

Sam.
   But some remain?

Free.
                        Ay, some.

Sam.
                                            And they are brave?

Free.
   No braver bandits e'er in deadly strife
   With man or tiger grappled.

Sam.
   Enough! hie quickly to thy forest haunts,
   And near the narrow pass where ye sustain'd
   The onset of Rasinga, wait my coming
   With all the armed mates thou canst assemble;
   And there I'll join thee with a trusty band.
   Do this, and thou shalt be rewarded richly.

Free.
   I will; nor do I doubt the recompense
   From such a noble chief will be most bountiful.

Sam.
   Tis well; be speedy, secret, faithful,—brave,
   I need not say. So let us separate,
   Nor stay for further parley; time is precious.

Free.
   I will but go to leave an offering
   At the Wiharé yonder; then with speed
   Wend to our woods.—But wherefore smilest thou?

Sam.
   Dost thou regard such duties?

Free.
                                            Ay, good sooth!
   Who has more need of favour from the gods
   Than he who leads a life of lawless peril?


 Exit.
Sam.

 exultingly .
   Ay, now, Rasinga, set thy costly chamber,
   While poor Artina sighs and weeps unheeded,
   In gallant order for thy fair new bride!
   Another bridegroom and another chamber
   Abide her which thou little thinkest of.


 Exit.
ACT II. SCENE I.
The castle of Samarkoon. Loud shouting heard without.

Enter several Domestics in confusion.
 st dom.
   What shouts are those? do enemies approach?
   What can we do in our brave master's absence?

 d dom.
   Ha! hear it now! it is no enemy;
   It is our lord himself; I know the sound.
   And lo! his messenger arrived with tidings.
Enter a Messenger.

   What are thy news?

Mess.
                                            Right joyful news, I warrant.
   Our master brings a bride, by conquest won,


 
   To be the bliss and sunshine of his house;
   A bride fair as the goddess, bright Patiné.

 st dom.
   Most unexpected tidings; won by conquest?

 d dom.
   With whom has he been fighting for such prize?

Mess.
   Fy, fy, despatch and make such preparation
   As may be fitting for a bride's reception:
   There is no time for telling stories now.
   Despatch, I say; do ye not hear them nearer?
   They are not many furlongs from the gate.


 Exeunt in haste, different ways.
SCENE II.
The hall or principal room of the castle.

Enter Samarkoon , leading in a lady covered with a veil, and followed by two female attendants; then a band of musicians and a train of armed men, with Ehleypoolie and several of his soldiers as prisoners. A nuptial chaunt or song is struck up.
SONG.
   Open wide the frontal gate,
   The lady comes in bridal state;
   Than wafted spices sweeter far,
   Brighter than the morning star;
   Modest as the lily wild,
   Gentle as a nurse's child.
   A lovelier prize, of prouder boast,
   Never chieftain's threshold corss'd.

   Like the beams of early day,
   Her eyes' quick flashes brightly play;
   Brightly play and gladden all
   On whom their kindly glances fall.
   Her lips in smiling weave a charm
   To keep the peopled house from harm.
   In happy moment is she come
   To bless a noble chieftain's home.

   Happy be her dwelling here,
   Many a day and month and year!
   Happy as the nested dove
   In her fruitful ark of love!
   Happy in her tented screen!
   Happy in her garden green!
   Thus we welcome, one and all,
   The lady to her chieftain's hall.
Sam.
   I give you all large thanks, my valiant warriors,
   For the good service ye have done to me
   Upon this day of happy fate. Ere long,
   This gentle lady too, I trust, will thank you,
   Albeit her present tears and alter'd state
   Have made her shrink and droop in cheerless silence.
   An ample recompense ye well have won,
   That shall not with a sparing hand be dealt.
   Meantime, partake our cheer and revelry;
   And let the wounded have attendance due;
   Let sorcery and medicine combine
   To mitigate their pain.

 Turning to the prisoners. 
                                            Nay, Ehleypoolie,
   Why from beneath those low'ring brows dost thou
   Cast on the ground such wan and wither'd looks?
   Thy martial enterprise fell somewhat short
   Of thy predictions and thy master's pleasure;
   But thou and all thy band have bravely fought,
   And no disgrace is coupled with your failure.

Ehley.
   Had not my amulets from this right arm
   Been at the onset torn, e'en ambush'd foes
   Had not so master'd us.

Sam.
   Well, be it so; good amulets hereafter
   Thou mayst secure, and fight with better luck.

Ehley.
   Ay, luck was on your side, good sooth! such luck
   As fiends and magic give. Another time—

Sam.
   What thou wilt do another time, at present
   We have no time to learn.


 To his followers generally. 
                                            Go where cool sparkling cups and sav'ry viands
   Will wasted strength recruit, and cheer your hearts.
   Ere long I'll join you at the board, and fill
   A hearty cup of health and thanks to all.

 Exeunt all but Samarkoon , the bride, and her female attendants.
   And now, dear maid, thou pearl and gem of beauty,
   The prize for which this bloody fray was fought,
   Wilt thou forgive a youthful lover's boldness,
   And the rude outrage by his love committed?
   Wilt thou not speak to me?

Bride.
                                            What can I say?
   I was the destined bride of great Rasinga;
   My father told me so.

Sam.
                                            But did thy heart—
   Did thine own heart, sweet maid, repeat the tale?
   And did it say to thee, “The elder chieftain
   Is he whom I approve; his younger rival
   Unworthy of my choice?

Bride.
   My choice! a modest virgin hath no choice.
   That I have seen you both; that both have seen
   My unveil'd face, alas! is my dishonour,
   Albeit most innocent of such exposure.

Sam.
   Say not dishonour; innocence is honour;
   And thou art innocent and therefore honourable,
   Though every slave and spearman of our train
   Had gazed upon thy face. The morning star
   Receives no taint for that a thousand eyes,
   All heavenward turn'd, admire its lovely brightness.


 
   Let me again look in thy dark soft eyes,
   And read my pardon in one beamy smile.


 Attempting to draw aside her veil, while she gathers it the closer.
Bride.
   Forbear, forbear! this is indignity.

Sam.
   And this, dear maid, is childish bashfulness.

 The upper fastening of the veil gives way and falls over her hand.
   And look, the silly fence drops of itself;
   An omen of good fortune to my love.
   Oh! while those eyes are fix'd upon the ground,
   Defended from too ardent admiration,
   With patience hear my suit.—Two rival chiefs
   Have look'd upon thy face, and thou perforce
   Must choose or one or other for thy husband.
   Rasinga, in his rich and noble mansion,
   Hath years already pass'd in wedded love;
   And is the husband of a virtuous dame,
   Whose faithful heart, in giving place to thee,
   Will be asunder torn. My house is humble;
   No gay and costly treasures deck its walls;
   But I am young, unmarried, and my heart
   Shall be thine own, whilst thou reignst mistress here,
   As shares the lion's mate his forest cave,
   In proud equality. Thou smilst at this;
   And it doth please thy fancy;—yea, a tear
   Falls on that smiling cheek; yes, thou art mine.

Bride.
   Too quickly dost thou scan a passing thought.

Sam.
   Thanks, thanks! O take my thanks for such dear words!
   And speak them yet again with that sweet voice
   Which makes my heart dance in its glowing cell.

 st att.

 advancing to Samarkoon .
   My lady is forspent with all this coil;
   She has much need of quiet rest. I pray,
   On her behalf, let this be granted to her.

Bride

 to  st att. .
   I thank thee, nurse!
 To Samarkoon. 
My lord, I would retire.

Sam.
   I will retire, or do whate'er thou wilt.
   Thy word or wish commands myself and mine.


 Exit.
 st att.
   Thyself and thine! a mighty rich dominion!
   Alack, alack-a-day, the woeful change!
   This rude unfurnish'd tower for the fair mansion
   Of great Rasinga! Evil was the hour
   When those fell demons stopped us on our way.

Bride.
   O, say not so! in great Rasinga's house
   A noble wife already holds her state,
   And here I shall have no divided pleasure.

 st att.
   Divided! Doth an elder faded wife
   In love, in honour, or in riches share
   Like portion with a youthful beauty? No!
   She doth herself become the flatt'ring subject
   Of her through whom the husband's favours flow;
   And thereby doth increase her rival's power
   Her state and dignity.
   Thou art a simple child, and hast no sense
   Of happiness or honour. Woe the day,
   When those fell demons stopp'd our high career!

Bride.
   But for my father's anger, and the blood
   Which has been shed in this untoward fray,
   The day were one of joy and not of woe,
   In my poor estimation.

 st att.
                                            Poor, indeed!

 d att.

 advancing .
   Fy, nurse! how canst thou so forget thyself?
   Thy words are rude; my lady is offended.

 st att.
   Who would not, so provoked, forget herself?
   Ah! the rich treasures of Rasinga's palace!
   His gaudy slaves, his splendid palanquins!
   They have pass'd from us like a mummer's show,
   Seen for an hour and gone.


Enter a female domestic.
Dom.
   My master bids me say, the lady's chamber
   Is now in readiness.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
The court of the castle.

Enter two domestics, meeting.
 st dom.
   The merry revelry continues still
   As if but just begun, though Samarkoon
   Reminds them anxiously, that preparation
   For the defence of this neglected hold,
   Is pressing matter of necessity.

 d dom.
   Those glutton bandits will not leave a board,
   On which good viands smoke or wine-cups sparkle,
   For all the words of threat'ning or entreaty,
   That mortal tongue can utter.


Enter a third domestic, in great alarm.
 d dom.
   Where is our master?

 st dom.
                                            What alarms thee so?

 d dom.
   There is a power of armed men advancing.
   I saw their dark heads winding through the pass
   Above the bushes shown; a lengthen'd line,
   Two hundred strong, I guess.

 st dom.
   It is Rasinga.

 d dom.
                                            Ring the larum bell,
   And rouse those drunken thieves from their debauch.

 d dom.
   But I must find our master; where is he?

 st dom.
   He was i' th' inner court some minutes since.


 The alarum bell has rang, and many people is confusion cross the stage as the scene closes.


 
SCENE IV.
An open space before the gate of the castle; armed men are discovered on the walls.

Enter Rasinga and his force.
Ras.

 to those on the walls .
   Where is that villain whom ye call your lord?
   Let him appear, and say, why, like a robber,—
   A reckless, lawless traitor, he hath dared
   My servants to attack, my bride to capture,
   And do most foul dishonour to my state.
   Am I a driv'ling fool,—a nerveless stripling,—
   A widow'd Rany, propping infants' rights,
   That thus he reckons with impunity
   To pour on me such outrage?


Enter Samarkoon above, and stands on the wall over the gate.
Sam.
   Rasinga, thou art robb'd and thou art wrong'd,
   And hast good cause to utter stormy words.

Ras.
   Ay, and good cause to back those stormy words
   With stormy blows, which soon shall force that gate,
   Make desp'rate entrance through the rifted walls,
   And leave within your paltry tower, of all
   Who dare oppose my arms, no living thing,
   Unless thou do restore the mountain beauty,
   And all the spoil thou hast so basely won.

Sam.
   Though I have dared to wrong thee, brave Rasinga,
   I've done it in the heat and agony
   Of passions that, within a generous breast,
   Are irresistible, and, be assured,
   With no weak calculations of impunity.
   The living treasure I have robb'd thee of
   I will defend to the extremity
   Of desp'rate effort, e'en in this poor hold,
   Mann'd as it is.—I well might speak to thee
   Of equal claims to that fair beauty's favour;
   Of secret love; of strong fraternal sympathy
   With her whose honour'd name I will not utter;
   But that were vain.

Ras.
                                            Vain as a sea-bird's screams,
   To check the wind-scourg'd ocean's rising billows:
   So far thou speakest wisely.—Stern defiance
   I cast to thee; receive it as thou mayst,
   Audacious traitor!

Sam.
                                            And I to thee do cast it back again
   With words and heart as dauntless as thine own.

Ras.

 to his followers .
   Here ends our waste of breath and waste of time.
   On, pioneers, and let your pond'rous mallets
   Break down the gate! To it, my valiant bowmen!
   Discharge a shower of arrows on that wall,
   And clear it of yon load of miscreant life.


 Rasinga' s followers raise a shout, which is answered by one equally loud from the adverse party, and the attack commences. After great efforts of attack and defence, the gate is at last forced, and Rasinga , with his force, enters the castle. The scene then closes.
SCENE V.
A wild mountain pass, with a bridge swung from one high perpendicular rock to another. The course of a small stream, with its herby margin, seen beneath. Martial music is heard, and a military procession seen at some distance, winding among the rocks, and at length crossing the bridge. Then come the followers of Rasinga in triumph, leading Samarkoon in chains, followed by men bearing a palanquin, and in the rear Rasinga himself, with his principal officers. As he is on the middle of the bridge , Juan De Creda enters below, and calls to him with a loud voice.
Juan.
   Rasinga, ho! thou noble chief, Rasinga!

Ras.

 above .
   Who calls on me?

Juan.
   Dost thou not know my voice?

Ras.
   Juan de Creda, is it thou indeed?
   Why do I find thee here?

Juan.
   Because the power, that rules o'er heaven and earth,
   Hath laid its high commission on my soul
   Here to arrest thee on thy fatal way.

Ras.
   What mean such solemn words?

Juan.
   Descend to me, and thou shalt know their meaning.


 Rasinga crosses the bridge and re-appears below.
Ras.
   I have obey'd thee, and do bid thee welcome
   To this fair land again.—But thou shrinkst back,
   Casting on me looks of upbraiding sorrow:
   With thee I may not lordly rights assert;
   What is thy pleasure?

Juan.
   Is he, the prisoner now led before thee,
   Loaded with chains, like a vile criminal,
   Is he the noble Samarkoon, thy brother?

Ras.
   Miscall not by such names that fetter'd villain:
   He, who once wore them with fair specious seeming,
   Is now extinct to honour, base and treacherous.
   The vilest carcass, trampled under foot
   By pond'rous elephant, for lawless deeds,
   Was ne'er inhabited by soul more worthless.

Juan.
   Thy bitter wrath ascribes to his offence
   A ten-fold turpitude. Suspect thy judgment.
   When two days' thought has communed with thy conscience,
   Of all the strong temptations that beset
   Unwary youth by potent passions urged,
   Thou wilt not pass on him so harsh a censure.

Ras.
   When two days' thought! If that he be alive,


 
   And wear a human semblance two days hence,
   In the fell serpent's folds, the tiger's paws,
   Or earthquake's pitchy crevice, with like speed,
   Be my abhorred end!

Juan.
                                            Hold, hold, Rasinga!
   The God, in whose high keeping is the fate
   Of every mortal man, or prince, or slave,
   Hath this behest declared,—that sinful man
   Should pardon grant to a repentant brother;
   Yea, more than this,—to his repentant enemies.
   So God commands: and wilt thou prove rebellious?

Ras.
   Ha! hast thou been in heaven since last we met,
   To bring from hence this precious message? Truly
   Thou speakst as if thou hadst.

Juan.
   No, I have found it in my native land,
   Within the pages of a sacred book,
   Which I and my compatriots do believe
   Contains the high revealed will of God.

Ras.
   Ha! then those Europeans, whom the sea
   Hath cast like fiends upon our eastern shores,
   To wrong and spoil and steep the soil with blood,
   Are not compatriots of thy book-taught land.
   What! dost thou cast thine eyes upon the ground?
   The stain of rushing blood is on thy cheek.
   If they be so, methinks they have obey'd
   That heavenly message sparingly.—Go to!
   Tell me no more of this fantastic virtue,—
   This mercy and forgiveness. E'en a woman,
   A child, a simpleton would laugh to scorn
   Such strange unnatural duty.

Juan.
   Call it not so till I have told thee further—


 Taking his hand.
Ras.
   Detain me not. But that to thee I owe
   My life from fatal sickness rescued,—dearly,
   Full dearly shouldst thou pay for such presumption.
   Let go thy hold!

Juan.
                                            I will not till thou promise,
   Before thy vengeful purpose be effected,
   To see me once again.

Ras.
   I promise then, thou proud and dauntless stranger;
   For benefits are traced in my remembrance
   With lines as ineffaceable as wrongs.


 Exeunt.
SCENE VI.
The house of Montebesa ; who enters, meeting a servant from the opposite side.
Mont.
   What com'st thou to impart? thy busy face
   Is full of mingled meaning, grief and gladness.

Serv.
   My Lord Rasinga, madam, is returned,—
   Return'd victorious; and the fair young bride
   Again is rescued by his matchless valour.

Mont.
   All this is good; hast thou no more to tell?

Serv.
   Alas! I have; for, by his spearmen guarded,
   Loaded with chains, most rueful to behold,
   Comes Samarkoon. For now it doth appear,
   That he, enleagued with robbers, was the spoiler,
   Who beat the gallant train of Ehleypoolie,
   And bore away their prize.

Mont.
   Oh, this is dreadful! Clouds o'erlapping clouds
   Are weaving o'er our house an evil woof,—
   A fearful canopy. It was to us
   That ominous sign was sent, but few days past,
   When Boodhoo's rays, beneath the noon's blue dome 
   With shiv'ring motion gleam'd in streaky brightness,
   Surpassing mid-day splendour. Woe is me!
   I saw it not unmoved; but little thought,
   Ah! little thought of misery like this.
Enter Juan de Creda.

   Welcome, De Creda; thou in hour of need
   Art ever wise and helpful. Dost thou know
   Of this most strange event? Of Samarkoon
   As lawless spoiler by Rasinga conquer'd,
   And led—

Juan.
                                            I do; and come to entreat thee, lady,
   That thou with thy enchafed and vengeful son
   Mayst use a mother's influence to save him.

Mont.
   Entreaties are not wanted, good De Creda,
   For herein I am zealous as thyself.

Juan.
   He must not die.

Mont.
                                            Nor shall, if I can save him.

Juan.
   Then let us meet Rasinga, as he passes,
   Ere he can reach the shelter of his chamber,
   Where men are wont to cherish moody wrath;
   And we will so beset him with our prayers,
   That we shall move his soul, if it be possible.
   The fair Artina too must come with us
   To beg her brother's life.

Mont.
   Yes, be it so; but first let us apprise her,
   And do it warily, lest sudden grief
   O'erwhelm her totally.

Juan.
                                            That will be necessary.
   And, lady, let us find her instantly;
   We have no time to spare.


 Exeunt.
SCENE VII.
A gallery or passage leading to Rasinga' s chamber.

Enter Rasinga , speaking to an officer, who follows him.
Ras.
   And let his dungeon be secured to the utmost
   With bolts and bars; and set a double guard
   To watch the entry. Make it sure, I say:
   For if thy prisoner escape, thy life


 
   Shall pay the forfeit. This thou knowest well,
   Therefore be vigilant.

 Exit officer.
   The very blood is boiling in my veins,
   Whilst the audacious braver of my rights,
   My arms, my honour, e'en within a dungeon
   And manacled with iron, breathes vital air.


Enter Montebesa by the farther end of the gallery, followed by Artina and Juan de Creda , who remain without advancing further, whilst she approaches her son with an air of dignity.
Mont.
   Rasinga, let a mother, who rejoices
   In every victory thy arms achieve,
   Be it o'er foreign, yea, or kindred foe,
   Greet thee right heartily!

Ras.
                                            I thank you, lady!

Mont.
   But that my pride in thee may be unmix'd
   With any sense of aught to taint thy glory,
   Grant me a boon that will enhance thy triumph,
   And make me say, with full, elated heart,
   Rasinga is my son.

Ras.
   Name it; whate'er a man may grant is thine.

Mont.
   The life of Samarkoon: that is my boon.

Ras.
   The life of Samarkoon! then thou dost ask
   The foul disgrace and ruin of thy son.

Mont.
   Not so; for thine own peace and future weal,
   I do adjure thee to be merciful.

Ras.
   And wouldst thou see the son whom thou didst bear,
   An unrevenged, despised, derided man?
   And have I gain'd from thee and my brave sire
   This manly stature and these hands of strength
   To play an idiot's or a woman's part?
   If such indeed be Montebesa's wish,
   Poor slight-boned, puny, shambling drivellers,
   Or sickly maidens, should have been the offspring
   Produced by her to mock a noble house.

Mont.
   O say not so! there will be no dishonour.

Ras.
   What! no dishonour in the mocking lips,
   And pointing fingers of the meanest peasant,
   Who would his whetted blade sheath in the heart
   Of his own mother's son for half the wrong,—
   Ay, half the wrong which that audacious traitor
   Has done to me! Cease, lady; say no more:
   I cannot henceforth live in ignominy;
   Therefore, good sooth! I cannot grant your boon.

Art.

 rushing forward and catching hold of his hand and his garments .
   Dear, dear Rasinga! wilt thou make my life
   One load of wretchedness? Thou'st cast me off,—
   I who so loved thee and love thee still,—
   Thou'st cast me off, and I will meekly bear it.
   Then, wilt thou not make some amends to me,
   In a saved brother's life, for all the tears,
   The bitter tears and anguish this has caused me?

Ras.

 shaking her off .
   Thy plea is also vain; away, away!
   Thy tears and anguish had been better comforted,
   Had he a more successful spoiler proved.

 Turning fiercely on Juan de Creda , who now advances.
   Ha! thou too art upon me! Thou whose kindred
   And colleagues are of those who read good lore,
   And speak like holy saints, and act like fiends.
   By my brave father's soul, where'er it be,
   Thou art a seemly suitor for such favour!


 Bursts away from them and exit.
Art.
   De Creda, good De Creda, dear De Creda!
   Wilt thou not follow him?

Juan.
   Not now; it were in vain; I might as well,
   While wreck of unroof'd cots and forest boughs,
   And sand and rooted herbage whirl aloft,
   Dark'ning the sky, bid the outrageous hurricane
   Spare a rock-cresting palm. But yet despair not;
   I'll find a season. Let me lead thee hence.

Mont.
   I fear the fierceness of his untamed spirit
   Will never yield until it be too late;
   And then he will, in brooding, vain repentance,
   The more relentless be to future criminals;
   As though the death of one he should have spared
   Made it injustice e'er to spare another.
   I know his dangerous nature all too well.


 Exeunt.
SCENE VIII.
A prison.

Samarkoon is discovered in chains; a lamp burning on the ground near him, and a pitcher of water by it.
Sam.
   And now the close of this my present being,
   With all its hopes, its happiness, and pain.
   Is near at hand,—a violent bloody close,
   Perhaps with added torture and disgrace.
   Oh, Kattragam, terrific deity! 
   Thy stern decrees have compass'd all this misery.
   Short, turbulent, and changeful, and disastrous,
   Hath been this stage of my existence. What,
   When this is past, abides me in my progress
   To the still blessing of unvision'd rest,
   Who may imagine or conjecture?—Blessing!
   Alas! it is a dull unjoyous blessing
   To lose, with consciousness of pain, all consciousness:
   The pleasure of sweet sounds and beauteous sights.
   Bride, sister, friends,—all vanish'd and extinct,
   That stilly, endless rest may be unbroken.
   Oh, oh! he is a miserable man,
   Who covets such a blessing!—Hush, bad thoughts!


 
   Rebellious, faithless thoughts! My misery
   Is deep enough to make e'en this a blessing.
Enter Artina.

   It cannot be! is it some fantasy?
   Who and what art thou?

Art.

 approaching him softly .
   The thing I seem; thy miserable sister.

Sam.
   My gen'rous, loving sister, in her love
   Running such fearful risk to comfort me.

Art.
   Nay, more than this, dear brother; more than comfort;
   I come to set thee free.

Sam.
                                            Has he relented?

Art.
   No, no! Rasinga is most ruthless. I,
   By means of this
 showing a signet ,
which, in our better days,
   It was my privilege to use at will,
   Have pass'd the guards, and may a short while hence
   By the same means return,—return in safety.
   Meantime let me undo those galling fetters;
   I've brought fit tools, and thou shalt teach me how.

Sam.
   But canst thou think the guards will let thee pass,
   E'en with thy signet, leading a companion?
   It cannot be; thou dost deceive thyself;
   Thy mis'ry and affection make thee foolish.

Art.
   Not so; there is a secret passage yonder.
   That stone
 pointing to it 
like many others in the wall,
   But rougher still
 goes close to the stone and touches it ,
look at it!
   take good heed,
   Has in its core a groove on which it turns:
   A man's full strength will move it, and despair
   Will make thee strong.

Sam.
   Were two men's strength required, I feel within me
   The means for such deliverance; if, indeed,
   Thou hast not been deceived by some false tale.

Art.
   I'm not deceived. But wait, when I am gone,
   With limbs yet seemingly enthrall'd, until
   The wary guard hath come to ascertain
   Thy presence here; and then, when he retires,—
   Thou knowst the rest.—Haste, let me loose thy shackles.
   Is this the way?


 Kneeling down and using her implements for breaking the chains, which she draws from the folds of her robe.
Sam.
   Well done, my most incomparable sister!
   Affection seems to teach thee craftsman's skill.

Art.
   This link is broken.

Sam.
                                            So it is indeed.
   If I am fated yet to live on earth,
   A prosp'rous man, I'll have thy figure graven,
   As now thou art, with implements in hand,
   And make of it a tutelary idol.

Art.

 still working at the chains. 
   Ha! thou speakst cheerly now; and thy changed voice
   Is a good omen. Dost thou not remember
   How once in play I bound thy stripling limbs
   With braided reeds, as a mock criminal?
   We little thought—Another link is conquer'd;
   And one alone remains.

 Tries to unloose it.
                                            But it is stubborn.
   Oh, if that I should now lack needed strength!
   Vile, hateful link, give way!


Enter Rasinga , and she starts up, letting fall her tools on the ground.
Ras.
   And thou art here, thou most rebellious woman!
   A faithful spy had given me notice of it,
   And yet, methought, it was impossible
   Thou couldst be so rebellious, so bereft
   Of female honour, matronly allegiance.

Art.
   Upbraid me not, my lord; I've at your feet
   Implored you to relent and spare his life,
   The last shoot of my father's honour'd house.
   But thou, with unrelenting tyranny,
   Hast chid me from thee.—Matronly allegiance,
   E'en in a favour'd and beloved wife,
   O'errules not every duty; and to her,
   Who is despised, abandon'd, and disgraced,
   Can it be more imperious? No, Rasinga;
   I were unmeet to wear a woman's form,
   If, with the means to save my brother's life,
   Not implicating thine, I had, from fear
   Of thy displeasure, grievous as it is,
   Forborne to use them.

Ras.
   Ha! such bold words to justify the act,
   Making rebellion virtue! Such audacity
   Calls for the punishment which law provides
   For faithless and for disobedient wives.

Sam.
   Rasinga, if that shameful threat be serious,
   Thou art the fellest, fiercest, meanest tyrant,
   That e'er joined human form to demon's spirit.

Ras.
   And dost thou also front me with a storm
   Of loud injurious clamour?—Ho, without!

 Calling aloud.
   I came not here to hold a wordy war
   With criminals and women.—Ho! I say.
Enter Guards.

   Secure the prisoner, and fasten tightly
   His unlock'd chains.—And, lady, come thou instantly
   To such enthralment as becomes thy crime.


 Exeunt Rasinga and Artina , who is led off by guards, while motioning her last farewell to Samarkoon. The scene closes.
SCENE IX.
An apartment in the house of Montebesa.

Samar is discovered playing on the floor with toys, and Sabaw atté sitting by him.
Samar

 holding up a toy .
   This is the prettiest plaything of them all:


 
   I will not use it till my mother come,
   That she may see it fresh and beautiful.

Sab.
   Alas, sweet Samar! would that she were here!

Samar.
   Will she not soon? how long she stays away!
   And she has been so kind to me of late.

Sab.
   Was she not always kind?

Samar.
   Yes, always very kind; but since my father
   Has thought of that new bride—I hate that bride—
   And spoken to me seldom and with looks
   Not like his wonted looks, she has been kinder;
   Has kiss'd me oftener, and has held me closer
   To her soft bosom. O she loves me dearly!
   And dearly I love her!—Where is she now,
   That thou shouldst say, “I would that she were here!”

Sab.
   Dear boy; I may not tell thee.

Samar.
                                            May not tell me!
   Then she is in some sad and hateful place,
   And I will go to her.

Sab.
                                            Ah no! thou canst not.

Samar.
   I will; what shall withhold me, Sabawatté?

Sab.
   Strong bolts and bars, dear child!

Samar.
                                            Is she in prison?

Sab.
   She is.

Samar.
                                            And who hath dared to put her there?

Sab.
   Thy father.

Samar.
                                            Then he is a wicked man,
   Most cruel and most wicked.
   I'll stay no longer here; I'll go to her;
   And if through bolts and bars I may not pass,
   I at her door will live, as my poor dog
   Close by my threshold lies and pines and moans,
   When he's shut out from me.—I needs must go;
   Rooms are too good for me when she's in prison.
   Come, lead me to the place; I charge thee, do;
   I'll stay no longer here.


Enter Montebesa , and he runs to her, clasping her knees, and bursting into tears.
Mont.
   What is the matter with thee, my dear child?

 To Sabawatté. 
   Does he know aught?

Sab.
   I could not keep it from him.

Samar.
   I know it all; I know it all, good granddame.
   O take me to her! take me to her prison!
   I'll be with her; I'll be and bide with her;
   No other place shall hold me.

Mont.
   Be pacified, dear child! be pacified,
   And I myself will take thee to thy mother:
   The guards will not refuse to let me pass.
   Weep not so bitterly, my own dear Samar!
   Fy! wipe away those tears and come with me.

Sab.
   A blessing on you, madam, for this goodness!
   It had been cruelty to keep him here.


 Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
The private chamber of Rasinga , who is discovered walking backwards and forwards in great agitation.
Ras.
   That I—that I alone must be restrain'd!
   The very meanest chief who holds a mansion
   May therein take his pleasure with a second,
   When that his earlier wife begins to fade,
   Or that his wearied heart longs for another.
   Ay, this may be; but I am deem'd a slave,
   A tamed—a woman bound—a simple fool.

 After a pause.
   Nor did I seek for it; fate was my tempter.
   That face of beauty was by fate unveil'd;
   And I must needs forbear to look upon it,
   Or looking, must forbear to love.—Bold traitor!
   That he should also, in that very moment,
   Catch the bright glimpse and dare to be my rival!
   Fy, fy! His jealous sister set him on.
   Why is my mind so rack'd and rent with this?
   Jealous, rebellious, spiteful, as she is,
   I need not, will not look upon her punishment.
   Beneath the wat'ry gleam one moment's struggle,—
   No more but this.

 Tossing his arms in agony.
                                            Oh, oh! there was a time,
   A time but shortly passed, when such a thought
   Had been—the cords of life had snapt asunder
   At such a thought.—And it must come to this!

 After another perturbed pause.
   It needs must be: I'm driven to the brink.
   What is a woman's life, or any life
   That poisons his repose for whom it flourish'd?
   I would have cherish'd, honour'd her, yet she,
   Rejecting all, has e'en to this extremity—
   No, no! it is that hateful fiend her brother,
   Who for his damn'd desires and my dishonour
   Hath urged her on.—The blood from his shorn trunk
   Shall to mine eyes be as the gushing fount
   To the parch'd pilgrim—Blood! but that his rank
   Forbids such execution, his marr'd carcass,
   A trampled mass—a spectacle of horror,
   Should—the detested traitor!

 Noise at the door.
                                            Who is there?

Juan without.
   Juan de Creda: pray undo thy door.

Ras.
   No, not to thee; not e'en to thee, De Creda.

Juan without.
   Nay, but thou must, or fail in honest truth.
   I have thy promise once again to see me


 
   Ere thy revengeful purpose take effect;
   Yea, and I hold thee to it.

Ras.
   Turn from my door, for thou since then hast seen me,
   And hast no further claim.

Juan

 without .
   Tamper not so unfairly with thy words:
   I saw thee as the forest peasant sees
   A hunted tiger passing to his lair.
   Is this sufficient to acquit thee? No;
   I claim thy promise still, as unredeem'd.
   Unbar thy chamber door and let me in.

Ras.

 opening the door, and as Juan enters .
   Come in, come in then, if it must be so.
   Is misery a pleasant sight to thee,
   That thou dost beg and pray to look upon it?

Juan.
   Forgive me, brave Rasinga, if I say,
   The mis'ry of thine alter'd face, to me
   Is sight more welcome than a brow composed.
   But 'tis again to change that haggard face
   To the composure of a peaceful mind,
   That I am come.—O deign to listen to me!
   Let me beseech thee not to wreck thy happiness
   For fell revenge!

Ras.
                                            Well, well; and were it so,
   I wreck my happiness to save my honour.

Juan.
   To save thine honour?

Ras.
                                            Yes; the meanest salve
   That turns the stubborn soil with dropping brow,
   Would hold an outraged, unrevenged chief,
   As more contemptible than torpid reptile
   That cannot sting the foot which treads upon it.

Juan.
   When fear or sordid motives are imputed
   As causes why revenge hath been forborne,
   Contempt will follow, from the natural feelings
   Of every breast, or savage or instructed.
   But when the valiant and the gen'rous pardon,
   E'en instantly as lightning rends the trunk
   Of the strong Nahagaha  pride of the wood,
   A kindred glow of admiration passes
   Through every manly bosom, proving surely,
   That men are brethren, children of one sire,
   The Lord of heaven and earth.

Ras.
   Perplex me not with vain and lofty words,
   That to the stunn'd ear of an injured man
   Are like the fitful sounds of a swoln torrent,
   Noble, but void of all distinctive meaning.

Juan.
   Their meaning is distinct as well as noble,
   Teaching to froward man the will of God.

Ras.
   And who taught thee to know this will of God?

Juan.
   Our sacred Scripture.

Ras.
                                            What? your Christian Scripture,
   Which, as I have been told, hath bred more discord
   Than all the other firebrands of the earth,
   With church opposed to church, and sect to sect,
   In fierce contention; ay, fell bloody strife.
   Certes, if all from the same book be taught,
   Its words may give, as I before have said,
   A noble sound, but no distinctive meaning.

Juan.
   That which thou hast been told of shameful discord,
   Perversely drawn from the pure source of peace,
   Is true; and yet it is a book of wisdom,
   Whose clear, important, general truths may guide
   The simplest and the wisest: truths which still
   Have been by every church and sect acknowledged.

Ras.
   And what, I pray, are these acknowledged precepts,
   Which they but learn, it seems, to disobey?

Juan.
   The love of God and of that blessed Being,
   Sent in His love to teach His will to men,
   Imploring them their hearts to purify
   From hatred, wrong, and ev'ry sensual excess,
   That in a happier world, when this is past,
   They may enjoy true blessedness for ever.

Ras.
   Then why hold all this coil concerning that
   Which is so plain, and excellent, and acknowledged?

Juan.
   Because they have in busy restless zeal
   Raised to importance slight and trivial parts;
   Contending for them, till they have at last
   Believed them of more moment, e'en than all
   The plain and lib'ral tenor of the whole.
   As if we should maintain a wart or mole
   To be the main distinctions of a man,
   Rather than the fair brow and upright form,—
   The graceful, general lineaments of nature.

Ras.
   This is indeed most strange: how hath it been?

Juan.
   The Scripture lay before them like the sky,
   With all its glorious stars, in some smooth pool
   Clearly reflected, till in busy idleness,
   Like children gath'ring pebbles on its brink,
   Each needs must cast his mite of learning in
   To try its depth, till sky, and stars, and glory,
   Become one wrinkled maze of wild confusion.
   But that good Scripture and its blessed Author
   Stand far apart from such perplex'd contention,
   As the bright sky from the distorted surface
   Of broken waters wherein it was imaged.

Ras.
   And this good Scripture does, as thou believest,
   Contain the will of God.

Juan.
                                            I do believe it.
   And therein is a noble duty taught,
   To pardon injuries,—to pardon enemies.

Ras.
   I do not doubt it. 'Tis an easy matter
   For holy sage or prophet in his cell,
   Who lives aloof from wrongs and injuries
   Which other men endure, to teach such precepts.



 
Juan.
   Most justly urged: but He who utter'd this
   Did not enforce it at a rate so easy.
   Though proved by many good and marv'llous acts
   To be the mission'd Son of the Most High,
   He meekly bore the wrongs of wicked men;
   And in the agonies of crucifixion,—
   The cruel death He died,—did from His cross
   Look up to heav'n in earnest supplication
   E'en for the men who were inflicting on Him
   Those shameful suff'rings,—pardon e'en for them.

Ras.

 bowing his head, and covering his face with his hands .
   Indeed, indeed, this was a noble Being.

Juan.
   Ay, brave Rasinga; ireful as thou art,
   Thou hast a heart to own such excellence.

 Laying his hand soothingly on Rasinga's .
   And do consider too how he who wrong'd thee,—
   The youthful Samarkoon—

Ras.

 shaking off his hand impatiently .
   Name not the villain!

Juan.
   That epithet belongs not to a youth,
   Who in the fever'd madness of strong passion,
   By beauty kindled. goaded by despair,
   Perhaps with sympathy, for that he deem'd
   A sister's sorrows—

Ras.
                                            Hold thy peace, De Creda;
   Thy words exasperate and stir within me
   The half-spent flames of wrath.
   He is a villain, an audacious villain;
   A most ungrateful, cunning, artful villain.
   Leave me, I charge thee, lest thou utter that
   Which might provoke me to unseemly outrage.
   Lowe my life to thee, and but for that—
   Leave me, I charge thee.

Juan.
   I do not fear what thou mayst do to me.

Ras.
   No; but I fear it: therefore quit me instantly.
   Out, out!

 Opening the door and pushing him away .
   Ho! Ehleypoolie! ye who wait without,
   I want your presence here.


 Exit Juan

Enter Ehleypoolie and Mihdoony .
Ehley.

 after having waited some time to receive the commands of his master, who, without noticing him, walks about the chamber in violent agitation .
   My lord, we humbly wait for your commands.

 Aside to Mihdoony .
   He heeds us not: as though we were not here.

 Aloud .
   We humbly wait, my lord, to know your pleasure.

Ras.
   My pleasure is—

 Stopping, and looking bewildered .
                                            I know not what it is.

Mih.
   Perhaps, my lord, you wish to countermand
   Some orders that regard the executions
   Fix'd for to-morrow, at an hour so early.

Ras.
   When did Rasinga countermand his orders,
   So call'd for, and so given?—Why wait ye here!

Ehley.
   You summon'd us, my lord; and well you know
   That Ehleypoolie hath a ready aptness
   For—

Ras.
                                            Boasting, fooling, flattery, and lies.
   Begone, I say; I did not summon you.
   At least I meant it not.


 Turns away hastily, and exit by another door .
Ehley.
   For boasting, fooling, flattery, and lies!
   How angry men pervert all sober judgment!
   If I commend myself, who, like myself,
   Can know so well my actual claims to praise?

Mih.
   Most true; for surely no one else doth know it.

Ehley.
   And fooling is an angry name for wit.

Mih.
   Thy wit is fooling; therefore should it seem,
   Thy fooling may be wit. Then for thy flattery,
   What dost thou say to that?

Ehley.
                                            Had he disliked it,
   It had been dealt to him in scantier measure.
   And lies—to hear a prince whose fitful humours
   Can mar or make the vassals who surround him,
   Name this as special charge on any one!
   His violent passions have reduced his judgment
   To very childishness.

Mih.
   But dost thou think the fierceness of his wrath
   Will make him really bring to execution
   A wife who has so long and dearly loved him?

Ehley.
   How should I know what he will really do?
   The words he spoke to me e'en now may show thee
   His judgment is obscured. But if he do;
   Where is the harm when faded wives are cross
   And will not live in quietness with a younger,
   To help them on a step to their Newané?
   She never favour'd me, that dame Artina,
   And I foresaw she would not come to good.


 Exeunt .
SCENE II.
A large court, or open space, with every thing prepared for the execution of Samarkoon : a seat of state near the front of the stage. Spectators and guards discovered .
 st spec.
   There is a mass of life assembled here:
   All eyes, no voice; there is not e'en the murmur
   Of stifled whispers.—Deep and solemn silence!

 d spec.
   Hush, hush! Artina comes, and by her side,
   Her son in the habiliments of one


 
   Prepared for death. This surely cannot be:
   It is impossible.

 st spec.
                                            I hope it is.


Enter Artina and Samar , with Sabawatté on the one side of them, and Juan de Creda on the other; attendants following .
Art.
   Alas, for thee, my noble, generous child!

Samar.
   Fear not for me, dear mother! Lean upon me.
   Nay, let me feel your hand upon my shoulder,
   And press'd more heavily. It pleases me,
   Weak as I am, to think I am thy prop.

Art.
   O what a prop thou wouldst have been to me!
   And what a creature for a loathly grave,—
   For death to prey upon!—Turn, turn! Oh, turn!
   Advance no further on this dreadful path

Samar.
   I came not here to turn; and for the path,
   And what it leads to, if you can endure it,
   Then so can I:—fear not for me, dear mother!
   Nay, do not fear at all; 'twill soon be over.

Art.
   Oh! my brave heart! my anguish and my pride,
   E'en on the very margin of the grave.—
   Good Sabawatté! hold him; take him from me.

Sab.
   I cannot, madam; and De Creda says,
   'Tis best that you should yield to his desire.

Art.
   It is a fearful—an appalling risk.

Sab.
   Is there aught else that you would charge me with?

Art.
   Yes, dearest friend, there is—it is my last.
   Let not my little daughters know of this;
   They are too young to miss me. Little Moora
   Will soon forget that she has seen my face;
   Therefore whoe'er is kind to them they'll love.
   Say this to her, who will so shortly fill
   Their mother's place, and she will pity them.
   Add, if thou wilt, that I such gentle dealings
   Expected from her hands, and bade thee teach them
   To love and honour her.

Sab.
   My heart will burst in uttering such words.

Art.
   Yet for my sake thou'lt do it; wilt thou not?


 Sabawatté motions assent, but cannot speak .

Enter Samarkoon chained and guarded .
Art.

 rushing on to meet him .
   My brother, my young Samarkoon; my brother,
   Whom I so loved in early, happy days;
   Thou top and blossom of my father's house!

Sam.
   Weep not, my sister; death brings sure relief;
   And many a brave man's son has died the death
   That now abideth me.

Art.
   Alas! ere that bright sun which shines so brightly
   Shall reach his noon, of my brave father's race
   No male descendant shall remain alive,—
   Not one to wear the honours of his name,—
   And I the cursed cause of all this wreck!
   Oh, what was I, that I presumptuously
   Should think to keep his undivided heart!
   'Twere better I had lived a drudge,—a slave,
   To do the meanest service of his house,
   Than see thee thus, my hapless, noble brother.

Sam.
   Lament not, gentle sister; to have seen thee
   Debased and scorn'd, and that most wondrous creature,
   Whose name I will not utter, made the means
   Of vexing thee—it would have driven me frantic.
   Then do not thus lament; nor think that I
   Of aught accuse thee. No; still let us be
   In love most dearly link'd, which only death
   Has power to sever.—

 To Samar , as first observing him .
                                            Boy, why art thou here?

Samar.
   To be my mother's partner and companion.
   'Tis meet; for who but me should cling to her?


Enter Rasinga , and places himself in the seat: a deep silence follows for a considerable time .
Mih.

 who has kept guard with his spearmen over Samarkoon , now approaching Rasinga .
   The hour is past, my lord, that was appointed;
   And you commanded me to give you notice.
   Is it your pleasure that the executioners
   Proceed to do their office on the prisoners,
   Who are all three prepared?

Ras.
                                            What dost thou say?

Mih.
   The three prepared for death abide your signal.

Ras.
   There are but two.

Mih.
   Forgive opposing words; there is a third.

Ras.
   A third, sayst thou? and who?

Mih.
   Your son, my lord;
   A volunteer for death, whom no persuasion
   Can move to be divided from his mother.

Ras.
   I cannot credit this; it is some craft,—
   Some poor device. Go, bring the boy to me.

 Mihdoony leads Samar to his father .
   Why art thou here, my child? and is it so,
   That thou dost wish to die?

Samar.
   I wish to be where'er my mother is,
   Alive or dead.

Ras.
                                            Think well of what thou sayst
   It shall be so if thou indeed desire it.
   But be advised! death is a dreadful thing.

Samar.
   They say it is: but I will be with her;
   I'll die her death, and feel but what she suffers.

Ras.
   And art thou not afraid? Thou'rt ignorant;
   Thou dost not know the misery of drowning;—
   The booming waters closing over thee,


 
   And thou still sinking, struggling in the tank,
   On whose deep bottom weeds and water snakes,
   And filthy lizards will around thee twine,
   While thou art choking. It is horrible.

Samar.
   The death that is appointed for my mother
   Is good enough for me. We'll be together:
   Clinging to her, I shall not be afraid,
   No, nor will she.

Ras.
   But wherefore wilt thou leave thy father, Samar?
   Thou'st not offended me; I love thee dearly;
   I have no son but thee.

Samar.
                                            But thou wilt soon,
   Thy new young wife will give thee soon another,
   And he will be thy son; but I will be
   Son of Artina. We'll be still together:
   When, in the form of antelope or loorie,
   She wends her way to Boodhoo, I shall still
   Be as her young one, sporting by her side.

Ras.

 catching him in his arms, and bursting into tears .
   My generous boy! my noble valiant boy!
   O such a son bestow'd on such a father!
   Live, noble creature! and thy mother also!
   Her crime is pardon'd, if it was a crime;
   Ye shall not be divided.

Samar

 running back to Artina .
   O mother! raise your eyes! you are to live;
   We're both to live; my father says we are.
   And he has wept, and he has kiss'd me too,
   As he was wont to do, ay, fonder far.
   Come, come!

 Pulling her towards Rasinga .
                                            He's good, you need not fear him now.

Ras.
   Artina, that brave child has won thy life;
   And he hath won for me—I have no words
   That can express what he hath won for me.
   But thou art sad and silent; how is this,
   With life, and such a son to make life sweet?

Art.
   I have a son, but my brave father, soon,—
   Who died an honour'd death, and in his grave
   Lies like an honour'd chief,—will have no son,
   No male descendant, living on the earth,
   To keep his name and lineage from extinction.


 Rasinga throws himself into his seat and buries his face in his mantle .
 st spec.

 in a low voice .
   Well timed and wisely spoken: 'tis a woman
   Worthy to be the mother of that boy.

 d spec.

 in a low voice to the first .
   Look, look,
   I pray thee, how Rasinga's breast
   Rises and falls beneath its silken vesture.

 st spec.

 as before .
   There is within a dreadful conflict passing,
   Known by these tokens, as swoln waves aloft
   Betray the secret earthquake's deep-pent struggles.

 d spec.

 as before .
   But he is calmer now, and puts away
   The cover from his face: he seems relieved.

Ras.

 looking round him .
   Approach, De Creda; thou hast stood aloof:
   Thou feelst my late rude passion and unkindness.
   Misery makes better men than I unkind;
   But pardon me, and I will make amends.
   I would not listen to thy friendly counsel,
   But now I will most freely grant to thee
   Whatever grace or favour thou desirest:
   Even now, before thou nam'st it.

Juan.
   Thanks, thanks, Rasinga! this is brave amends.

 Runs to Samarkoon , and commands his chains to be knocked off, speaking impatiently as it is doing .
   Out on such tardy bungling! Ye are craftsmen
   Who know full well the art to bind men's limbs,
   But not to set them free.

 Leads Samarkoon when unbound towards Rasinga , speaking to him as they go .
   Come, noble Samarkoon! nay, look more gracious:
   If thou disdainst to thank him for thy life,
   That falls to me, and I will do it gladly.

 Presenting Samarkoon to Rasinga .
   This is the boon which thou hast granted me,
   The life of Samarkoon: a boon more precious
   To him who grants than who receives it. Yet
   Take my most ardent thanks; take many thanks
   From other grateful bosoms, beating near thee.

Art.

 kneeling to embrace the knees of Rasinga .
   And mine; O mine! wilt thou not look upon me?
   I do not now repine that thou art changed:
   Be happy with another fairer dame,
   It shall not grieve me now.

Ras.

 raising her .
   Away, Artina, do not thank me thus.
   Remove her, Samarkoon, a little space.

 Waving them off .
   Juan de Creda, art thou satisfied?
   Have I done well?

Juan.
                                            Yes, I am satisfied.

Ras.

 drawing himself up with dignity .
   But I am not; and that which I have done
   Would not have satisfied the generous Saviour
   Who died upon the cross. Thy friend is pardon'd,
   And more than pardon'd;—he is now my brother,
   And I to him resign the mountain bride.


 A shout of joy bursts from all around : Artina folds Samar to her breast, and Samarkoon falls at the feet of Rasinga .
Sam.
   My noble generous foe, whom I have wrong'd;
   Urged by strong passions, wrong'd most grievously!
   Now may I kneel to thee without disgrace,
   For thou hast bound me with those bands of strength
   That do ennoble, not disgrace the bravest.

Ras.
   Rise, Samarkoon; I do accept thy thanks
   Since that which I resign is worth—But cease!
   Speak not of this—if it be possible,


 
   We'll think of this no more.

 Turning to Artina .
   And now, my only and my noble wife,
   And thou, my dauntless boy, stand by my side,
   And I, so flank'd, will feel myself in honour,—
   Honour that lifts and warms and cheers the heart.
   And we shall have a feast within our walls;
   Our good De Creda, he will tarry with us;
   He will not go to-morrow as he threaten'd.

Juan.
   I'll stay with you a day beyond the time,
   And then I must depart; a pressing duty
   Compels me so to do.

Ras.
   But thou'lt return again, and bring with thee
   The sacred Book which thou hast told me of?

Juan.
   I will return again and bring that book,
   If Heaven permit. But man's uncertain life
   Is like a rain-drop hanging on the bough,
   Among ten thousand of its sparkling kindred,
   The remnants of some passing thunder shower,
   Which have their moments, dropping one by one,
   And which shall soonest lose its perilous hold
   We cannot guess.—
   I, on the continent, must for a time
   A wand'rer be; if I return no more,
   You may conclude death has prevented me.


Enter Montebesa .
Ras.
   Ha, mother! welcome, welcome, Montebesa!
   There; take again your daughter and her boy.
   We've striven stoutly with a fearful storm,
   But, thanks to good De Creda, it is past;
   And all the brighter shall our sky appear,
   For that the clouds which have obscured its face
   Were of a denseness dark and terrible.


 The scene closes .

NOTES
 Very small leeches which infest many of the woods of Ceylon, and torment travellers.
 , A high mountainous ridge in Ceylon, where the one side is sunny, clear, and warm, the other cloudy, wet, and cold.
 The final reward of the virtuous after death, according to the Boodhoo religion, is perfect rest or insensibility; and that state, or the region in which it takes place, is called Niwané.
 Doulas, a kind of drums, beat on one end by the hand and on the other with a stick.
 Bright rays which appear in the middle of the day, surpassing the brightness of the sun, and are supposed to foretel evil.
 The name of the Cingalese Spirit of Evil, or God of Destruction.
 The iron tree.

ROMIERO: A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Don Romiero , a noble Spaniard .

Don Guzman , his friend .

Don Maurice , a youth in love with Beatrice .

Don Sebastian , father of Zorada .

Jerome , domestic of Romiero .

Pietro , domestic of Romiero .

Mariners, passengers, domestics, &c.

WOMEN Zorada , the wife of Romiero .

Beatrice , her friend .

Nurse .



Scene in or near the castle of Romiero , by the seashore of the Mediterranean. Time, during the reign of Peter the Cruel, King of Castile, towards the middle of the th century.


 
ACT I. SCENE I.
The sea-shore after a storm, with the masts of a wrecked vessel seen above the water at a distance, and casks and various chests, boards, &c. floating on the waves. Enter shipwrecked mariners and passengers, followed by Sebastian , who keeps apart from the others .
 st pass.
   Well, sirs! to tread on firm dry earth again
   Makes the heart glad and thankful.

 st mar.
                                            With good cause;
   For a dry grave at home is, after all,
   The secret wish and prayer of every seaman,
   Ay, even the boldest of us.
   None hath so long or roughly lived at sea
   As to be careless where his bones are laid,—
   In sacred ground, or in the gulfy deep.
   And thou, too, thinkst so, if I read thee right.


 To  d passenger .
 d pass.
   Ay, so in truth thou dost; I said my prayers
   Devoutly as the tempest louder wax'd,
   Nor am ashamed to own it.

 d mar.
   Nor needs to be so; seaman as I am,
   Let me, as oft as fortune beckons me,
   On summer seas or rough December's waves,
   Career it boldly with my jolly mates;
   But let me die at last in mine own cot,
   With all my kinsfolk round me. My poor wife!
   She listens to the winds when others sleep,
   And thinks,—Well, well! we are all safe on shore.

 d mar.
   But, saving this, what have we else to cheer us?
   Men on dry land are hungry and lack food;
   We cannot live on safety only. See,
   Here comes a countryman. Ho! friend, I say!
 Calling off the stage .

 Voice answering without .

   What dost thou say? I cannot hear thy words.

 d mar.
   Come hither, if thou hast a Christian heart,
   Or any charity; come near, I pray thee.


Enter Pietro .
Pie.
   What is your will with me?

 d mar.
                                            I pray thee, friend,
   What shore is this? Be there or food, or shelter,
   Or Christian pity in these parts? Thou seest
   What miserable shipwreck'd men we are.

Pie.
   Yes, ye are cast upon a shore, where shelter
   And Christian pity never are withheld
   From those who want them. Seest thou through the trees
   That castle? There a noble lady dwells,
   Who will have pity on you.

 d mar.
   Thank Providence for this! Your noble ladies,
   When once they take to goodness, are most bountiful:
   The best of all; the men to them are nothing.

 st pass.
   She hath no lord then?

Pie.
                                            He is absent now,
   Kept at the king's high court, as it is said,
   But my opinion is—

 d mar.
                                            Whate'er it be,
   That is not our concern. What is his name?

Pie.
   They call him Don Romiero.

Seb.

 advancing hastily .
   What saidst thou? Is he absent?

Pie.
   He is, but his good lady will relieve you,
   Ye need not fear for that.

Seb.
   We will not fear. Ye love that lady, then,
   Who is, ye say, so good?

Pie.
   How should we else? A very brute would love her.

Seb.
   Yes, thou sayst well; she was e'en from her birth—
   I mean, all ladies sprung from noble blood
   Are, from their birth, to generous actions train'd;
   At least, it should be so.

Pie.
   And is so, friend; for I have oft observ'd
   Good birth and breeding, as in my own lady,
   With gracious kindness join'd.

Seb.
                                            What is her name?

Pie.
   Donna Zorada. Thou hast heard, belike,
   How her poor father—

Seb.

 turning away .
   No; I hear no stories;
   I am a man withdrawn from worldly coil,
   Who hears or cares for nothing.

Pie.

 to d mar. 
   This is no mariner? and he speaks strangely.

 d mar.
   The strangest thing is that he spoke at all.
   We took him up at sea from a small boat,
   Which, by the moonlight, we descried afar,
   Like a black cockle on the glimmering waves;
   But whether earth or hell had sent him to us,
   We doubted much.

 st mar.
   Nay; when the hurricane wax'd to its pitch
   We scarcely doubted, and were once resolved
   To cast him overboard. Yet, ne'ertheless,
   He hath escaped; and God be praised, we did not.

Pie.
   Hush! he returns again. Go on, poor souls,
   In lucky hour ye come; for in that wood
   Not many paces hence, amongst the trees,
   Donna Zorada takes her morning walk;
   You'll find her there. Come, I will lead you to her:
   And, as we go, there are some words of counsel
   Which I shall give to you. They may be useful;
   For age, and some small share of shrewd observance,
   Have made me, though I say it, fit to counsel.



 
 st mar.
   Do so, good man, and heaven reward thy kindness!


 Exeunt all but Sebastian .
Seb.

 alone .
   So near her! Led, as by the hand of heaven,
   Even to her very door! And I shall shortly
   See her again, and hold her to my heart!
   My child! my child! Oh! when those gentle eyes
   Look on my woe-worn face and alter'd form,
   And these coarse weeds, how will thy piteous heart
   Swell e'en to bursting! In that wood hard by,—
   So near me! Blessed heaven hath brought me here.


 Exit .
SCENE II.
A wood, with various walks and alleys cut through it. Enter Zorada and Beatrice , speaking as they enter .
Bea.
   In truth, I slept it out. At times, indeed,
   A sound came to my ears, as it had been
   The distant roar of wheels, and then I dreamt
   Of coursing chariots and approaching crowds,
   And courtly tournaments, and tried in vain
   To cast my richest mantle o'er my form,
   To meet the coming show!

Zor.
   Thy mantle for the show!

Bea.
                                            Yes, but perversely,
   Still, as one tassell'd end across my shoulders
   I had composed, the others to the ground
   Fell dangling all awry. Then I look'd down,
   And, O sight of confusion! Canst thou guess
   What saw I then?

Zor.
                                            Some fearful thing, no doubt.

Bea.
   My own bare feet unslipper'd and unhosed,
   That on the chequer'd floor began to move
   In dancing measure. Yea, the very blood
   Rush'd to my cheeks; I felt it in my dream.

Zor.
   How could a dream so vain find harbourage
   In thy fantastic brain, my little friend,
   On such a dreadful night?

Bea.
   It was the tempest's sound that brought the dream.

Zor.
   So grand a cause producing thoughts so vain!

Bea.
   Who takes account of that? Thou wert awake,
   Else thou, belike, hadst ta'en the mighty blast
   For the quick waving of some gallant's hat
   To cool thy glowing cheek, or the soft winnowing
   Of outstretch'd pinions—Cupid's wings, perhaps;
   Or those of downy swans, as I have seen them,
   Scared from the sedgy margin of the lake,
   Bending their hurried flight across thy path.

Zor.
   I was, indeed, awake, and heard with awe
   The war of elements, whose mingled roar
   Brought to mine ear the howl of raging fiends,
   The lash of mountain billows, the wild shrieks
   Of sinking wretches; and at intervals
   Cross'd strangely with the near distinctive sounds
   Of clatt'ring casements, creaking beams and doors
   Burst from their fastenings, swinging in the blast.
   It was a fearful night; and many a soul,
   On sea and land, have found a dismal end.

Bea.
   Ay, we shall hear sad tales of this ere long,
   When seated round our evening fire. Alas!
   It will be piteous; but, the ill then past,
   It will be soft and pleasing piteousness.

Zor.
   Sad tales, I fear! O how my sympathy
   Follows the seaman's hardy, perilous life;
   And the poor passengers, torn from their homes
   To toss upon the rude and fathomless deep,
   Who shall no more on the dry land set foot,
   Nor find a peaceful rest e'en for their bones.
   It is a dismal thought.

Bea.
   And yet how fair and bright the morning shines,
   As if it laugh'd at all the late turmoil!
   There's not a cloud in the whole azure sky.

Zor.
   None, save those little wanderers, pure as snow,
   Those wild bewilder'd things, so hasting on
   Like sea-birds to their rock.—What men are these?


Enter Mariners, &c.
 st mar.
   We are, an' please ye, good and noble lady,
   Poor shipwreck'd seamen, cast upon your shore;
   Our all is lost; and we are spent and faint
   For want of food.

Zor.
                                            Ye shall not want it long.
   Go to the castle, where all needful succour
   Will be provided for you.—From what port?
   But stop not now to answer idle questions.
   Are ye all mariners?

 st mar.

 pointing to pass. 
   Those men are merchants;
   And he who lingers yonder 'midst the bushes,
   Is one we found at sea, some leagues from shore.
   We know not what he is.

Zor.
   Why keeps he thus aloof? Call to him, friend.

 st mar.

 calling off the stage. 
   Ho! there; come this way, sir; the lady calls ye.

Zor.
   He has a noble air, though coarsely clad.
   How is it that he moves so tardily?

 d mar.
   He's wayward, lady; neither mores nor speaks
   Like other men.

Zor.
                                            Nay, do not speak so harshly
   Of one so circumstanced; your fellow-sufferer.


Enter Sebastian , bending his head, and keeping his eyes fixed on the ground .
   Good stranger, be assured you're welcome here,
   And be not so desponding.


 He bows in silence, and she seems agitaled .  To the mariners, &c .
   Pass on, my friends; this lady will conduct you.
   Wilt thou, my Beatrice, do this kind office?
   And I will follow shortly. Tell my people
   To serve these shipwreek'd strangers bountifully.



 
Mariners, &c.

 speaking all together .
   God bless your liberal heart, my noble lady!


 Exeunt all but Zor . and Seb .
Zor.

 eagerly .
   Who art thou?

Seb.
   Hush, till they be farther off.

Zor.
   Oh! is it thou?

Seb.
   Stand from me; no embrace;
   They may look back and see us.

Zor.
   How slow they move! Will they ne'er gain the thicket?
   My yearning heart will burst; how slow they move!

 Stands looking after them impatiently and trembling all over for a few minutes. 
   Now they are out of sight.

 Rushing into his arms .
   My father! my dear father!

Seb.
                                            My dear child!

Zor.
   Oh! art thou here in dread? come here to see me
   In peril of discovery? too, too kind!
   Dear father! kind, and good, and dear to me,
   How and where'er thou art. I fear, I fear
   Thou art not as I would: tears in thine eyes,
   And anguish on thy face! How hast thou fared?

Seb.
   Thou shalt hear all when I have words to tell thee.

Zor.
   Not now; take breath awhile, and be composed.
   Lean on the grass, and I will fetch thee nourishment.

Seb.

 preventing her from going .
   Not now, dear child
   I am composed again, and from my side
   Thou shalt not move, till I have told thee all.

 After a pause .
   Thou knowst the bitter wrongs and foul affront,
   Which my ungrateful monarch put upon me,
   As meet reward for many years of service.
   Ay, though I say it, valiant, faithful service
   In field and council.

Zor.
   I know it all too well; a burning shame
   That he should so requite thee! Some base wretch
   Hath tempted him with—

Seb.
                                            Say his noble nature,—
   I think it once was noble,—was abused
   By the base machinations of my foes.
   Say what thou wilt; I was a man, a soldier,
   And sought revenge, that baleful remedy
   For bitterness of heart.

Zor.
   Nay, pause, I pray you! do not tell it now:
   Thou art too much distress'd.

Seb.
   No, hear it now; 'tis short, and when once told,
   One misery is past. Leagued with three chiefs,
   Resentful as myself, we did in secret
   Derise the means, and soon had reach'd our mark.

Zor.
   Your mark! O what was that?

Seb.
   I see the fearful meaning of thine eye;
   But be not so disturb'd.—Our mark indeed
   Was vengeance, but not murder.—On his throne
   We meant to place a nobler prince, whose hand
   Had even justice to his subjects dealt.
   We meant to place on Pedro's worthles brow
   That which became it better than a crown.

Zor.
   I understand;—a monk's unseemly cowl.
   I'm glad you did not mean to shed his blood.

Seb.
   My gentle child, we meant but as I say.
   And while revenging my especial wrongs,
   We should have freed Castile from a hard master,
   Who now sheds noble blood upon the scaffold,
   As lavishly as hinds the common water
   Of village pool cast o'er their arid fields.
   And yet to kindle in our native land
   The flames of civil discord, even this
   Has often rack'd my mind with many doubts,
   Recoiling thoughts, and feelings of remorse.

Zor.
   Ha! that indeed had been a fearful consequence,
   Had your concerted enterprise succeeded.
   But speak not now of this. How did you fail?

Seb.
   Amongst our number, one accursed traitor
   Like Judas lurk'd, and to the royal ear
   Divulged the whole.—But we were warn'd of this,
   And fled, each as he might. I gain'd the coast,
   And lay disguised till I could find a boat,
   In which I reach'd last night that founder'd bark,
   Whose slender mast just peeps above the surge,
   Like some black wizard's wand, token of ill.

Zor.
   No, not of ill, dear father, but of good.
   'Tis heaven hath sent thee here.
   My lord did write to me some distant hints
   Of your sad story. When he shall return,
   He will protect you. Cherish'd here with us,
   You shall in secret live, till fair occasion
   Shall offer to convey you where you would,—
   Some land of safety.

Seb.
   Thy lord's return! no, no! beware of that!
   He may not be my friend.—Nay, it is said
   That he and others, from their kindred ties
   Suspected as abettors of our treason,
   To clear themselves, have sworn unto the king,
   Dead or alive, wherever they may find us,
   Our bodies to deliver to his power.

Zor.
   'Tis false! thou wrongst Romiero.
   Do not believe it. Some false Judas also
   Hath, in this point, deceived you. No, he did not—
   He swore no oath so cruel and so base.
   Do not believe it.—Hark! the castle bell!


 Bell sounds .
Seb.
   Some traveller of note must be arrived.

Zor.
   And I must quit my dear and honour'd parent,
   With heartless ceremony to receive
   A most unwelcome guest.—
   Enter that tangled path; it leads to shelter,
   An aged woman's cot, where thou mayst rest
   And have refreshment. She will minister
   To thy necessity. O woe is me!
   That any hand but mine should have that office!

Seb.
   When shall we meet again?



 
Zor.
   At fall of eve beneath the castle wall,
   Near to the northern postern. Heaven watch o'er thee!
   There's some one coming! part as we were strangers,
   Without one sign of love. That is the path.


 Exit Sebastian ; and, after a pause , Don Maurice enters by the opposite side .
Maur.
   Good tidings! Don Romiero is arrived.

Zor.
   My lord return'd? and art thou sure 'tis he?

Maur.
   Yes, I am sure; why should I doubt it, madam?
   His train is in the court, and joyful vassals,
   Hearing the notice bell, crowd in to greet him.
   I have not seen him yet, but am in haste
   Come to apprise you of it.

 Observing Zorada motion with her hand, and point as to something at a distance .
   What man is that to whom you motion so?

Zor.
   A shipwreck'd stranger, who inquired his way,
   But was about to take the erring path.

Maur.
   He has a stately air, though mean his garb;
   I'll go myself and guide him through the wood.

Zor.
   No, no! I pray thee, let us to the castle.

Maur.
   I'll follow thee: but, 'faith, I fain would go
   And hold some parley with that stranger. Surely
   He is no common man.

Zor.
                                            I do beseech thee!

Maur.
   I'll soon return.


 Going .
Zor.
                                            O stay, Don Maurice, stay.

Maur.
   Why? How is this?

Zor.
                                            I cannot stir without thee.

Maur.
   What is the matter, lady? You are pale.

Zor.
   I've wrench'd my foot: I'm lame; I'm faint with pain.
   I pray thee let me lean upon thine arm.

Maur.
   Ay, to the world's end. Nay, lean all thy weight,
   And let me bear thee up: thou dost but grasp me
   As if to hold me fast. The pain is violent.

Zor.
   No, it is better now; 'tis almost gone,
   But I walk lamely still. Let us proceed.


 Exeunt .
ACT II. SCENE I.
An open entrance hall in the castle . Jerome , vassals, and domestics, are discovered in waiting. Enter Pietro .
Pie.

 to Jer .
   So, our good master is return'd in safety:
   May I not see him?

Jer.
   No, not now, good Pietro.

Pie.
   Not now! how so? It is my privilege,
   Which he has granted to this hoary head,
   To see him, unreproved, whene'er I list.
   I needs must greet him.

Jer.
                                            Thou hadst better not!
   Donna Zorada is not in the castle
   To welcome his return: till he hath seen her,
   I think thy courtesy would have small chance
   Of courteous reception.

Pie.
   Well, be it so: what changes wedlock makes,
   That Don Romiero should be so possess'd!
   He should have wedded earlier, as I think,
   Or not so young a bride. For, as they say,
   Let all things be in right and due proportion.
   Let not the hart play gambols with the fawn.
   Plant not a sapling olive by the side
   Of the broad oak. Link not the bony staghound—

Jer.
   Truce with thy wisdom, now! see, he is coming.


Enter Romiero , in a hurried, impatient manner, followed by Guzman .
Rom.
   Not yet return'd! Go, Jerome, to the wood,
   That is her favourite walk.

Jer.
   Please you, my lord, I have sent Blas already
   To search the wood, and now he is return'd.


Enter Blas .
Rom.
   Hast found her, Blas?

Blas.
   Yes, she will soon be here;
   She's coming from the wood.

Rom.
                                            With steps, I warrant,
   Light as the bounding roe.

Blas.
                                            Nay, good my lord,
   Donna Zorada, somewhat lame, I guess,
   Comes with slow steps, supported on the arm
   Of young Don Maurice.

Rom.
   I'll bear her in my arms: she is in pain.
   The very pressure of the velvet turf
   Will do her injury.


 Exit hastily .
Guz.

 to Pie .
   Thou wearst a surly smile upon thy face,
   Good Pietro, mine old friend; what may it mean?
   Thy lord, methinks, is a right tender husband.

Pie.
   Ay, marry is he! I remember well
   His lady mother urged him oft to wed.
   “Become a woman's toy!” quoth he: “am I
   Of such soft matter form'd, that you, forsooth
   Would make a husband of me?” Then he'd speak
   Of women, even the fairest and the best,
   With such sharp taunts, that she, good lady, sigh'd,
   And in despair forbore all further plea.

Guz.
   But dost thou think he spake unfeignedly?



 
Pie.
   Why should he feign with her who gave him birth?
   She was a woman of good parts, well taught
   Sober, and wise.

Guz.
                                            And yet it might be so.

Pie.
   I cannot tell; for now, as I remember,
   His love for Donna Laura none suspected,
   Till he was found at midnight in the vault
   Lamenting o'er her grave.
   'Twas said that many a night a sheeted spectre
   Haunted the spot: that spectre was Romiero.

Guz.
   It might be so: and yet he is not close,
   Concealing what he feels, but with his friends
   Free and confiding.

Pie.
                                            Yes, St. Lawrence bless him.
   His thoughts must have their vent; but yet I say,
   And know it well, none did suspect his love
   Till he was found lamenting o'er her grave.
   Ah! many a cheerful face hides careful heart!
   This is a saying well approved by all.
   For sound experience teaches many things,
   Which, as my mother, heaven rest her soul,
   Was wont to say—

Guz.
                                            Excuse me now, good Pietro;
   I'll stay and hear it all another time;
   I am in haste.


 Exit .
Pie.

 looking after him with displeasure .
   He too in haste! That light and heedless youth,
   Full of their youthful sports, should be impatient
   When sober serious men begin to speak,
   Is nothing marvellous; it was always so.
   But now the evil still goes on increasing,
   And men of middle age and understanding
   Are e'en as light and foolish as the young.
   An evil sign, I trow, of evil times.
   Should it go on increasing, by my certes!
   Ere I have spoken half a sentence, off
   Each foolish varlet I address will run,
   And leave me most discourteously to find,
   As it may chance, another auditor
   For the remaining half.—O foolish times!
   Foolish and evil too!


 Exit .
SCENE II.
Zorada 's apartment. Enter Romiero and Zorada .
Rom.
   Feelst thou no pain, my love? Thou art fatigued.
   Ah! why didst thou refuse thine own support?
   These arms that to the earth's far verge would bear,
   Blessing their toil, so sweet, so dear a burthen.

Zor.
   Indeed, my lord, I needed no support;
   The pain had passed away: I walked with ease.

Rom.
   The foolish envious pain which cast thee, sweet,
   Upon another's care. Thus, thus, and thus

 Kissing her cheeks, and then both her hands, one after the other .
   I pay thee my devotion. Nay, look on me,
   Smile on me thy sweet smiles, and raise thine eyes,
   Sweet mate, sweet play-fellow, pretty Zorada!

Zor.
   Nay, good my lord, these words are full of fondness,
   And yet they please me not. What shall I say?
   Speak to me as a wife, companion, friend,
   Not as a petted darling. Art thou well?
   How has it fared with thee since last we parted?
   My father too—what dost thou know of him?

Rom.
   Thou needst not fear for him; he has escaped;
   He is in safety in a foreign land,
   Where he, I hope, will end his days in peace.

Zor.
   And shall I ne'er behold his face again?

 He shakes his head .
   O but I will! I'll go to comfort him,
   And so wilt thou. Why dost thou turn from me?
   May it not be?

Rom.
   Oh ask me not! I've sworn—

Zor.
   What hast thou sworn?

Rom.
   I cannot tell thee now.

Zor.
   Then it is true!

 Turning from him with violent gestures of distress and displeasure to the end of the chamber; then returning and looking in his face upbraidingly .
   How couldst thou; Oh! how couldst thou
   Swear to deliver to the tyrant's vengeance,
   Dead or alive, wherever thou shalt find him,
   My father, thine old friend, the brave Sebastian?
   Is it not so? If thou hast sworn an oath
   Less terrible than this, tell it me quickly.

Rom.
   Dear love, he is in safety far from hence,
   This oath, as to his life, is nugatory;
   And, but for it, thou ne'er hadst seen thy husband.
   Thou knowst the cruel nature of Don Pedro.
   Ah! why that face of sorrow and displeasure?
   Alas! I see I am not welcome here.

Zor.
   No; say not so.

Rom.
                                            How can I then explain
   Thy sad averted looks? Where art thou going?

Zor.
   I'm faint; I am not well; I'm sick at heart;
   I long to be alone.

Rom.
   Life of my life! Indeed, thou art not well;
   Then wherefore leave this chamber?

 Pointing to a couch .
   Here lay thee down, and I will watch by thee.

Zor.
   I'll rest me in my closet for a while!
   I'm wayward grown, and love to be alone.

Rom.
   No; say not so; I know thou art not wayward;
   It is not in thy nature; but distress,
   From filial duty, strain'd, perhaps, too far,
   Hath made thee so. Remain, my love, with me;
   Thou wilt forgive me when thou hast consider'd.

Zor.
   I cannot now consider, with a heart
   Gored to the quick. I pray you, then, my lord,
   Permit me to retire.



 
Rom.
   I'll lead thee to thy closet: lean on me.

 She waves him off with her hand .
   Wilt thou not deign to do it?

 Exit Zorada , still motioning him not to follow her ;  stopping, with clasped hands, in a thoughtful posture, after having paced several times rapidly across the room. 
   An absent father and a present husband
   I' th' scales are put, and, to all outward seeming,
   The last doth kick the beam. Is it for this—
   For this that I have given my freedom up,
   Drawn every strong affection of my heart
   To one dear point?—and this the poor return!

 After a second pause .
   My life in such a perilous circumstance,
   And now restored to her and to my home!
   This is of small account. O woman, woman!
   One corner of a gallant's passing fancy
   Pleaseth thee well; the whole devoted heart
   Of man matured is to thee as a yoke,
   A cumb'rous weight from which thou wouldst escape;
   And friendship, filial duty, every tie
   Defrauds thy husband of his dear-earned rights.

 After pacing again through the room as before .
   I am a fool! I knew the heart of woman—
   Knew what she had to give, and, Oh! too well,
   What might, at price of many an inward pang,
   To her be given; yet, ne'ertheless, forsooth!
   I murmur at my lot.


 These last words spoken while Don Guzman is entering behind him .
Guz.
   What art thou mutt'ring? Murmurs at thy lot!
   Were these the words I heard thee utter now
   In such a smother'd voice? With fair Zorada
   Within that lot comprised, wouldst thou exchange it
   For any other man's?

Rom.
   No; not for his who fills th' imperial throne.

Guz.
   What ails thee, then, possessing such a treasure?

Rom.
   Ay, if I did possess it.

Guz.
   Dost thou not?

Rom.
   The heart I do not. Call ye it possessing,
   When any tie of friendship or of nature
   Crosses the vows which she has given to love?

Guz.
   I do not understand fantastic notions
   And fine-spun niceties of sentiment.
   I'll comprehend thee better presently.

Rom.
   'Tis plain and simple matter. My return,
   Though from a perilous state, gives to Zorada
   Slight pleasure: her affections and concern
   Are all engross'd by what is duty call'd
   To her unhappy father. I am nothing.

Guz.
   And is this all, indeed, that troubles thee?

Rom.
   Should there be more? Why dost thou smile so strangely?

Guz.
   At thy most simple folly, noble friend.
   Surely the men in these degenerate days,
   When every high-plumed youth and idle stripling
   Hath leave to play his gambols in the sight
   Of maids and married dames without reproof,
   And pour bewitching nonsense in their ears
   At feast or tourney, is most fortunate,
   Who can but charge a young and lovely wife
   With too much duteous love for her old father.

 Laughing heartily .
   I needs must laugh: thou art fantastical.

Rom.
   No; thou art light of heart and canst not judge:
   Having no care thyself, thou art incredulous
   Of any cause which others have for care.
   To speak to thee of what I feel, is folly,
   Though, from long habitude, I needs must do it.
   Thou hast no sympathy, and yet my heart
   Clings to thee as a friend.

Guz.
                                            Nay; fie upon thee!
   Thou knowst full well that unto the world's end
   I'd run to serve thee, though my pliant lip
   Cannot approve of all thy fleeting notions.
   But we'll debate no more on things so irksome.
   I came to say that Maurice hath invited me
   To see some curious cave which yesterday
   He first discover'd, as along the shore
   In quest of sea-birds' eggs he idly wander'd.

Rom.
   Has he been here so long?

Guz.
   Doubtless he has. It is a curious sight
   This fairy cave, as he described it to me:
   I shall be absent for an hour or so;
   Perhaps, a little longer.


 Exit .
Rom.

 alone .
                                            He is fortunate,
   Who can but charge a young and lively wife
   With too much duteous love for her old father!
   The smile that follow'd too,—that had its meaning.
   Lame and not lame, and leaning on his arm!
   The stroke darts through me like an adder's sting,
   Though but so slightly given.


Re-enter Guzman with Maurice .
Guz.
   Maurice is come with me to tempt thee out,
   If we may be so bold. The fairy cave
   Is a short ride from hence, the day is cool,
   And we will wait thy pleasure.

Maur.
   I pray you be entreated, good my lord.

Rom.
   I thank ye both; I mean to stay at home.

Maur.
   What! here alone, the ladies being retired?
   On such a day as this, when the blue waves
   Heaving and sinking in the sunny gleam.
   Show all the changes of their crisped sides
   Like the seam'd foldings of a silken robe;
   When every sea-bird is upon the wing
   Skimming and diving for his finny prey;
   When distant vessels, tacking to the breeze.
   Seem dames whose snowy kirtles are stretch'd out
   To the slow measure of some courtly dance;—
   On such a day as this to stay at home
   In gloomy chambers pent—



 
Rom.
   Surprises thee.

Maur.
   In truth it does. Methinks on such a day,
   Did not we see above the glassy brine
   The mast of that wreck'd vessel still appear
   To tell the dismal tale of last night's storm,
   One would with buoyant heart say to the ocean,
   Let us career it o'er thy surgy fields
   To every coast o' th' earth.

Rom.
   I doubt not, sir, 'tis a fair sight to those
   Who come so far afield to look upon it.
   Is thine old tutor dead, or dame Magera,
   That thou art rambling gallantly at large
   In this our distant province?—Dost thou blush?
   That is a folly, if thou hast no cause.

Maur.
   I fear, my lord, I have offended you.
   I am as free to ramble now at large
   As any he who reckons twice my years;
   Nor should my visit to this distant province
   Be deem'd an idle ramble; Don Fernandez,
   My aged kinsman, claims some duty of me:
   I am an inmate of his lonely tower.

Guz.
   Pooh! boy, thou'st said enough, and somewhat more:
   Who cares about thy visit to thy kinsman?

Rom.
   Who does not care? It is an age of duty;
   Nought now is cherish'd in the tender breast
   But ties of blood; and his good company,
   With all his lore and saws and thrice-told tales,
   Will well reward the virtue of this youth.
   Go to your cave, and see it in its beauty:
   The billows else may wash its shelly sides,
   And make it bare and little worth to-morrow.

 Aside to Guzman .
   Take him away: why do ye linger here?

Guz.

 aside to him .
   Why speakst thou so unkindly to the youth?

Rom.

 aside .
   Spoke I unkindly? Then 'twas unawares,
   I meant it not.

Guz.

 aside .
   Be civil to him then, and make amends;
   He stares and wonders at such taunting words.

Rom.

 aloud .
   A pleasant ride, my friends.

 They turn to go, and he calls after them .
   And hark, Don Maurice!
   If thou preferr'st a wayward captious host
   For such I do confess myself to be,
   With two fair ladies both methinks are fair,
   To thine old kinsman's company, return,
   And be one night at least our honour'd guest.

Maur.
   I do, with thanks, accept your courtesy.


 Exeunt Maurice and Guzman .
Rom.

 looking after Maurice .
   The very eye and visage, light and thoughtless;
   A woman's varying blushes with the tint
   Of sun-burnt hunter mix'd; the very form,
   Slight as a stripling, statured as a man,
   Which has—detested spell! so oft beguiled
   The female fancy, prizing worthless show.

 After a pause .
   Can it be so? O no! it cannot be;
   I but distract myself. I'll crush within me
   All thoughts which this way tend, as pois'nous asps
   That sting the soul and turn its bliss to bane.

 After another pause .
   To think of it no more, indeed, were good,
   If it were possible. And yet to know
   The truth, if fair or foul, were better still;
   They are both placed beneath my observation;
   'Tis well I did invite him for the night.


 Rings a bell violently .

Enter Jerome .

 A pause , Romiero seeming unwilling to speak .
Jer.
   What do you want, my lord?

Rom.
   Thyself, good Jerome.
   Who follow'd thee? I heard a creaking step.

Jer.
   It was mine own, my lord.

Rom.
   'Tis well; come nearer, man. How many oaks
   Have by my brawny foresters been fell'd,
   Since I left home?

Jer.
                                            I do not know, my lord.
   Shall I inquire?

Rom.
   Of what wouldst thou inquire?

Jer.
   The oaks which you have just been speaking of.
   Do you not wish to know—

Rom.
   True; but I have another thing to say.
   How many times hath this young don been here
   To visit Donna Beatrice?

Jer.
   To visit her?

Rom.
                                            Yes, fool! to visit her.
   Why dost thou look so strangely at the question?
   Answer it in few words and faithfully.

Jer.
   He hath, for some days past, come to the gate,
   At noon-tide hour or so, but whom to visit
   It suits not me to say.

Rom.
   Then! 'tis not Beatrice he comes to visit?

Jer.
   It does not so appear; it may,—it may not.

Rom.
   Why dost thou hesitate and stammer thus?
   Art thou afraid to speak? What is the matter?

Jer.
   Nothing, my lord, but you did fix your eyes
   With such a keen intenseness on my face,
   I fear'd I might offend.

Rom.
   How fear'd, unless the thing thou hast to say
   Should be of bad import?

Jer.
                                            As I breathe life,
   Nothing of good or bad import have I
   To tell your honour.

Rom.
                                            Well, well! be it so.
   Thy strange bewilder'd face made me suspect thee.
   Why dost thou wait?

Jer.
                                            Your further pleasure, sir.

Rom.
   There's nothing else.—Yes, yes! go bid my huntsman
   Prepare him for to-morrow's early chace.



 
Jer.
   Why, good my lord! he died the very day
   Before you left the castle.

Rom.
   Ay, true, I had forgotten.—Get thee gone.

 Exit Jerome .  Alone .
   I like not his scar'd face and wary words:
   Something is always wrong when such as he
   Stammer, and stare, and weigh their phrases so.


 Exit .
SCENE III.
Night. A grove near the walls of the castle, which is seen in the background, the moon appearing behind it. Enter Maurice .
Maur.

 after listening .
   No footstep near, no stirring of the boughs,
   Which cast their darken'd forms, distinct and motionless,
   Athwart the paly lustre of the moon!
   No gentle messenger to meet my hopes!—
   Ah Hope! who makest the lover still thy fool!
   Do I not know that she would give her presence
   To no man living at an hour like this,
   In such a spot as this, yet twice already
   Some birch's shiny stem or blossom'd shrub
   Have been to me her very form and semblance.
   She may despise my billet—tear it—burn it,
   Yet my heart beats as though—Ha! here comes Jerome.
Enter Jerome .

   What news?

Jer.
   Good news.

Maur.
                                            I'd smother thee with kisses,
   But that thou art such an unseemly hound.
   How look'd she? Was she angry? Was she pleas'd?
   Will she vouchsafe to hear me plead my suit?

Jer.
   She will.

Maur.
                        And where?

Jer.
                                            In the long gallery,
   Now unfrequented. I will be on watch
   That no intruder break upon your meeting.

Maur.
   Prince of Castile, go doff thy hat and plume;
   I am a prouder, happier man than thou!

Jer.
   Hush, hush! begone,—I hear a noise without.

Maur.
   Where?

Jer.
   To the right. We'll take the other path;
   Though I must needs return by this again.


 Exeunt. Enter Zorada and Nurse by the opposite side .
Zor.
   Stand thou aside, good nurse; I'll on some paces,
   And softly call; if he be near at hand,
   He'll know my voice.

 Coming forward to a thicket near the front of the stage .
   Ho! art thou there? come forth;—come forth and fear not.
   Perhaps he has mistaken thy direction,
   I think he is in covert farther on.
   I hear a rustling, yonder, to the left.


 Returns again to the bottom of the stage, and enter Sebastian . They embrace each other, while nurse stands apart .
Seb.
   My child! my dear Zorada!

Zor.
                                            Dear, dear father!

Seb.
   And thou must meet me as a man proscribed:
   Child of a parent, reft of name and honours,
   Bann'd by the church, and by the laws condemn'd
   E'en to the traitor's death of degradation:
   One whom to name were pain and insult to thee;
   One now despised of all, forgot, accurst.

Zor.
   O not accurst! for I will bless thee, father,
   Though every other tongue should blast thy fame.
   O not forgotten! I'll remember thee;
   Ay; nightly, daily, hourly, in my thoughts
   Shalt thou have place; more cherish'd—more endear'd,
   For that all hearts beside have shut thee out.
   O not despised! for I will honour thee,
   And in my pious thoughts, as now in act,
   Kneel at thine honour'd feet in faithful duty.

Seb.
   Rise, dearest, kindest, best, mine own Zorada!
   Yes, child; thou shalt be all the world to me;
   But it must be a faint, ideal world.
   I may in dreams, in thought, in musing fancy
   Behold thy face, thy form,—may hear thy voice—
   But many a league of ocean and of land
   Must lie between us. E'en my dying day
   Will not be lighten'd with one look of thine.

Zor.

 after weeping on his neck .
   We do not know what heaven appoints for us.

Seb.
   Has Don Romiero spoken aught to thee
   Respecting my sad fate?

Zor.
   He has: 'tis true—the dreadful tale is true.
   The king has bound him by the horrid oath
   Which thou didst mention to me.—Base compliance!

Seb.
   Nay, blame him not; he took it in the faith
   That I was safe, beyond the reach of power.
   But this being so, I needs must rest in hiding,
   Secure and close, till thou canst find a vessel
   To take me from the coast.

Zor.
   There is within the precincts of this wood
   An old abandon'd chapel, where the dead
   Rest undisturbed. No living tenant there,
   But owlet hooting on the ruin'd tower,
   Or twitt'ring swallow in his eaves-screen'd nest,
   Will share the dismal shelter: for a time
   Thou mayst be there secure. My good old nurse
   Has all things duly stored for food and rest,
   And will conduct thee to it. Come, dear nurse!


 
   Greet thine old master in his time of sorrow,
   And take of him good care.

Nurse.
   Yea, that I will; for unto me and mine
   He hath been ever kind and bountiful.
   O woe the day! that I should have occasion
   To do him such a service!

Seb.
   Ay, nurse; there be sad changes in men's fortunes.
   The day when first I saw thee to thy breast
   Lay this dear child, a little toothless infant,
   Whilst o'er ye both bent with fond beaming eyes
   The best and fairest lady of the land,
   For so she was,—that was indeed a day—
   A day of brightness. Ah! how different
   From this most dismal hour!

Nurse.
   She was a noble lady, fair and gentle!
   This wicked world did not deserve to hold her,
   And so her time was short. And for her babe—
   My babe;—I call'd her mine, and still will call her,—
   A very cherub, peeping from the clouds,
   As our fair pictures show them, is less beautiful
   Than she half-covered with her cradle-clothes,
   When waking from her morning's sleep, appear'd.
   Ah me! the pleasant days that I remember!

Zor.

 alarmed .
   I hear a noise.

Seb.
   Thou art, my dearest child, alarm'd for nothing.

Zor.
   Yes; I fear every thing. But, right or wrong,
   Go instantly, nor linger longer here.
   Nay, go: we do not part: I'll see thee soon.

Seb.
   Heaven bless thee, then! Come, nurse, I'm now thy child,
   Cherish me kindly.

Nurse.
   Ay, bless your honour! I will do my best.
   I'd give the life-blood in this poor old heart
   For you and yours.


 Exeunt Sebastian and nurse . Zorada goes by the opposite side, meeting Jerome , who enters at the same time, and hurries along, covering her face as she passes him .
Jer.
   Who's that who starts aside with guilty haste?

 Following her .
   Ho! damsel, mistress, whosoe'er thou be,
   Let me have words of thee. I swear, good faith!
   I'll take thee safely to thy rendezvous,
   If thou wilt trust me.

 Following her off the stage, and then returning .
   What have I done? What have I seen? No face,
   For that was closely cover'd, but the figure,
   The robe, the air,—if it be not Zorada,
   I am a fool—a purblind, mazy fool,
   And do not know my right hand from my left.
   What brings her here? Were't any other woman,
   It were an easy thing to guess her purpose.
   Well, who lives long may see strange things, they say;
   And if I needs must give my thoughts the rein,
   I'll curb my tongue.


 Exit .
ACT III. SCENE I.
An outer room in the apartments of Zorada , with a wide door opening in the bottom of the stage, which shows a magnificent bedchamber, where Romiero is discovered walking to and fro in a distracted manner; he then rushes hastily from it to the front of the stage, and bends his ear to listen.
Rom.
   No footstep yet: all's still: 'tis past endurance.
   So late! the first night, too, of my return!
   Is it the tardiness of cold aversion?
   'Tis more than that; some damned conference
   Elsewhere detains her. Ay, that airy fool
   Wore at the supper-board a conscious look,
   Glancing in concert with the half-check'd smile
   That moved his quiv'ring cheek, too well betraying
   His inward triumph: 'twas a cursed smile;
   I would have cast my javelin at his throat,
   But shame withheld me.—She the while did sit
   With pensive fearful eye, that always fell,
   Beneath my keen inquiring look, reproved.
   Is virtue thus demure, restrain'd, mysterious?
   She, too, who was as cheerful as the light,
   Courting the notice of my looks! no, no!
   Some blasting change is here. What can be done?
   For something must be done.

 A pause and listening .
                                            Ho there without!
   Who walks at this late hour?—A heavy step;
   Have they their emissaries on the watch
   To give them notice of my movements? Ho!
   Ho there without!
Enter Servant.

   What dost thou up? Why art thou not abed?

Serv.
   My lord, it is not yet our hour of rest.

Rom.
   Thou liest! 'Tis late; 'tis past the midnight watch.

Serv.
   I do believe scarce half an hour has past
   Since I did light your honour from the hall.

Rom.
   Peace! thou art fool or knave, I know not which.
   I've pass'd since then two hours as truly told
   As sun on dial moves.—Why shrinkst thou back?

Serv.
   I hear my lady coming.

Rom.
   Coming at last! Haste! leave me; go thy ways.
 Exit servant .

 Putting out a lamp which stands on a side table .

   Out light! The partial gleam from yonder door,
   Will, as she enters, fall upon her strongly;
   I'll stand aside, and mark her face unseen.


 

Enter Zorada , who stops short to wipe tears from her eyes, &c., as if preparing herself to appear composed; whilst Romiero , in the shade, after eyeing her suspiciously, bursts suddenly upon her.
   Have done with all this smoothing of thy features,
   And look as sad and rueful as thou wilt.
   The tardy, slow unwillingness, and all
   Thy strange demeanour of this day, too well
   Speak that which e'en the smiles of Hebe's cheek,
   Hadst thou more female art such smiles to copy,
   Could not gainsay.—Where hast thou been so long?
   Wilt thou not answer me?

Zor.
   You frighten me, Romiero, as I reckon
   'Tis little past our usual hour of rest.

Rom.
   Thou dost evade the question. Not the time;—
   Where hast thou been?

Zor.
                                            Have patience—O have patience!
   Where I have been I have done thee no wrong:
   Let that suffice thee.

Rom.
                                            Ha! thou'rt quick, methinks,
   To apprehend suspicion. Done no wrong!
   What call'st thou wrong? Yea, by that sacred band
   Which linketh soul to soul in wedded love,
   Pure, fervent, and confiding,—every thought,
   Fancy, and consciousness, that from thy husband,
   Unfitting for his ear, must be withheld,
   Is wrong to him, and is disgrace to thee.

Zor.
   Then woe is me! Since wives must be so perfect,
   Why didst thou wed Zorada de Modinez?

Rom.
   Dost thou upbraid me for it? Then too well
   I see the change.—Yes, I will call it change,
   For I must still believe thou lovedst me once.

Zor.
   Yes, yes! I loved thee once, I love thee now,
   And will for ever love thee, dear Romiero,
   If thou wilt suffer me.

Rom.
   Suffer thee, dear Zorada! it is paradise
   To think thou lovest me, hell to doubt of it.

Zor.
   Then doubt it not. If I am cold and sad,
   I have a cause,—I must repeat my words,—
   Which does to thee no wrong. Some few days hence
   Thou shalt know all, and thou wilt pity me.
   Did I e'er tell thee that which afterwards
   Thou foundst to be untrue?

Rom.
   Thou never didst.

Zor.
                                            Then why suspect me now?

Rom.
   Give me thy dear, dear hand, my own sweet wife!
   Yes, I will trust thee, and do thou the while
   Think charitably of my stern rebuke.
   Love can be stern as well as tender, yet
   Be all the while most true and fervent love.
   But go to rest, dear child, and I will follow thee;
   For it indeed is late.

 Stands musing as she retires, then turning suddenly .
   Zorada!

Zor.

 returning .
   What, my lord?

Rom.
   Forget not, lore,
   That soothing ointment of such efficacy.

Zor.
   For what, I pray?

Rom.
                                            Didst thou not wrench thy foot?

Zor.
   O, not at all.

Rom.
                                            Didst thou not say thou hadst?

Zor.
   O that was but a feint to cheat Don Maurice.

Rom.
   To cheat him! wherefore cheat him? for what end?
   Was it a time for childish freaks like that?
   And the deep colour crimsoning thy cheek—
   What does it say?—Go to! thou needst not speak.

Zor.
   Indeed, indeed you err; my heedless words—

Rom.
   Were very, very heedless.—Go to bed;
   Go, go! my hour of rest is distant still.
   Linger not here, I say; retire to rest.

 Exit Zorada into the chamber .  After musing some time .
   I do not think her wicked, but there lurks
   Within her fancy vain and dangerous things.
   Those striplings,—those light, beardless playfellows
   The devil himself hath not an imp more subtle
   Than one of these.—They laugh, and mock, and mimic,
   And cast upon the lovely face of virtue,
   The gloomy veil of cloister'd melancholy,
   While vice is all so gay and deftly trick'd,
   That who can choose but range them on her side?
   To break down every sacred tie, what is it?
   'Tis but a merry trick!—
   Ay, she was wary, too, in her expressions:
   “Did I e'er tell thee that which afterwards
   Thou foundst to be untrue.”—Equivocation,
   A half-corrupted woman's poor device.

 Muses and mutters to himself a few moments longer, and then paces up and down with slow irresolute steps .
   —A half corrupted woman!
   If it be come to this, who shall restrain
   The hateful progress, which as rapidly—
   Restrain it! No! to hell's profoundest pit
   Let it conduct her, if she hath so far
   Debased her once pure mind, and injured me.
   I dare not think on't, yet I am compell'd;
   And at the very thought a raging fire
   Burns in my head, my heart, through every vein
   Of this distracted frame. I'll to the ramparts,
   And meet the chillness of the midnight wind;
   I cannot rest beneath this hateful roof.


 Exit .


 
SCENE II.
An old Gothic gallery, with doors leading to different apartments. Enter Jerome , carrying a light, and followed by Don Maurice .
Maur.
   I am the first at our appointed place,
   Which is beseeming in affairs of love.
   I hope, meantime, she is upon the way.
   List, dost thou hear a step?

Jer.
   My ears are not so quick.

Maur.
   Am I again deceived? and hearst thou nothing?

Jer.
   I hear the swallows stirring in their nests,
   Disturb'd with sudden light. Such creatures build
   In ev'ry crevice of those mouldering arches.

Maur.
   Didst thou not tell me these adjoining chambers
   Are all untenanted, and no one near us.

Jer.

 pointing .
   Yes, all are empty but that further room,
   In which Don Guzman chooses to abide,
   That from its lofty windows he may see
   A more extensive prospect.

Maur.
   Would he were at the utmost verge of all
   That may be thence survey'd!—I like it not:
   He is a dangerous neighbour.

Jer.
   But he is tired and gone, ere this, to rest:
   You need not fear to be disturb'd by him.

Maur.
   I hear a footstep now she comes, she comes!
   O she is good and punctual to my wish!
   Do thou retire, good Jerome.
Enter Beatrice attended, and Jerome with her female attendant keep on the background, while Maurice , running eagerly to her, leads her nearer the front.

   My charming Beatrice! may I indeed
   Believe that thou art here; that thou vouchsafest
   To come with thoughts of favour for thy slave?

Bea.
   Perhaps I do but dream I am so bold.
   It is so strange,—my mind is so bewilder'd!

Maur.
   And why bewilder'd, love? There's nought to fear.

Bea.
   I've heard sounds of alarm, and seen faint forms,
   That seem'd to follow me, and yet were nothing.
   I thought the very stones of the old walls
   Did call my name and know me as I pass'd.

Maur.
   Fear nothing, love: this place is unfrequented:
   Swallows or bats may whisper of our meeting,
   But nought besides.—Oh! how I have desired
   To tell thee all my heart; on bended knee
   To plead my cause!—My fate is in thy hands;
   And since thou hast such pity of my pain
   As thus to listen to me, may I hope
   Thou wilt be better still?

Bea.
   Go not so fast: perhaps I am but come
   To chide thee for thy most presumptuous message.

Maur.
   And if thou do, I'll bear it all so meekly,
   That thou wilt say within thy cunning self,
   “This man, in truth, is made to be a husband.”

Bea.
   It were no cunning but a foolish self
   Could hold such inward parley. Every gallant
   Would laugh most certainly within himself,
   On hearing such a sober, grave conclusion
   Join'd to the noted name of gay Don Maurice.

Maur.
   Nay, do not twit me now with all the freaks,
   And levities, and gambols charged upon me
   By every lean-faced dame that wears a hood.
   I will be grave, and dismal, and punctilious
   As heir at miser's funeral, if thou wilt,
   And all the while as blithe o' heart as he.
   I have as many fashions and demeanours,
   As mantles in a lady's wardrobe; choose,—
   I'll be whate'er thou wilt, if in return
   Thou wilt obey me but for some few hours.

Bea.
   I hear a noise.

Maur.
   Only the wind that moves yon creaking door.
   Step farther this way.

 Leading her to the opposite side of the stage, near the door of Guzman' s chamber .
   The time is precious, my most charming mistress!
   Let me speak plainly in few words. Thou knowst
   How much I fear Romiero's apt suspicion.
   Delay were dangerous: therefore by the dawn,
   In the dark grove of pines, meet me, prepared
   To quit with me the castle, and for life
   To share my lot. Deny me not: time presses:
   O let me urge thee!—As for life I plead.

Bea.

 after a pause .
   What can I say?—I feel I should not say it,
   And yet I feel thou dost not plead in vain.

Maur.
   Thou'lt meet me then,—do not retract thy words.
   There is no time for slow deliberation.
   Thou'lt meet me by the dawn?

Bea.
   Yes; I will meet thee in the grove of pines.


Enter at the bottom of the stage a Servant, who whispers to Jerome , and then retires, upon which Jerome advances hastily to Maurice .
Maur.
   What is the matter?

Jer.
   Romiero is not yet in bed. A spy
   Who stood on watch without has given me notice.
   He wanders through the house like one possess'd,
   And may at last invade your privacy.

Maur.
   He is not yet so near us. We shall hear him
   Ere he approach.

Jer.
                                            His motions oft are sudden.

Bea.
   Retire, retire! I'll meet thee by the dawn;
   So, till that time, adieu.


 Exeunt .


 
SCENE III.
Don Guzman' s chamber, who is discovered sleeping in his chair. Enter Romiero .
Rom.
   Not yet abed! Ay, but he is asleep.
   Happy unwedded! Thou canst soundly sleep;
   Nor woman's fickleness, nor woman's guilt,
   Can bring disgrace or agony to thee.
   I'll not disturb him.

 After remaining for awhile on the front of the stage musing and muttering to himself, he speaks, but in a low voice .
   The heart, the heart! What prize we but the heart!

 Mutters again, then breaks out in loud and vehement utterance .
   No; though his lips had never touch'd her hand,
   If that be lost, I'm wretched!

Guz.

 waking .
   What sound is that? Who's there? Ha! thou, my friend!

Rom.
   What has so startled thee?

Guz.
                                            The voice that woke me.
   Thou must have heard it; 'twas a human voice.

Rom.
   It was mine own, Don Guzman.

Guz.
   What has befallen? Why wert thou so alarm'd?
   Or was it some sharp pang of bodily pain?

Rom.
   No, no! it was not that; and I am here
   Only to share thy chamber for the night.

Guz.
   And why? I am amazed.

Rom.
   I've paced o'er ramparts, halls, and galleries,
   Till I have need of rest.

Guz.
   And thou wouldst find it here? What strange caprice
   Debars thee from the fair Zorada's chamber;
   That place which gives the rest of paradise?

Rom.
   Ah! so it did to me. It was a spot
   Where every lovely—every sweetest thing
   In seeming shelter, bloom'd i' th' early sun,
   Till the first sultry breath of southern winds
   Blasted its freshness, leaving nought behind
   But tainted fragrance—sere and faded flowers.
   It was the magic palace of a dream,
   Changed in an instant to some dismal den:
   It was a bower of healthful innocence,
   Changed to a lazar's vile and loathly ward:
   It was—Oh, oh! I know not what I say,
   Thinking of what I was and what I am.

Guz.
   Nay; give thy ruffled thoughts a little pause;
   Be well assured things are not as thou fearst.
   She did appear so good.

Rom.
                                            Alas! she did.
   If I but droop'd or look'd a little pale,
   The stroke of her soft hand, her kindly words,
   Her sweet breath on my cheek,—O! it did turn
   The hour of pain to bliss!—And all this happiness
   Was but delusion—but a hov'ring vapour
   That covers for awhile the fenny pool.

Guz.
   No, say not so! Is it not far more likely
   That the delusion rests with thee, my friend?

Rom.

 after musing, and without heeding what Guzman has said .
   Ay, if I did but droop, her look of sympathy
   Went to my soul. Or if I parted from her,
   Though only for a week—a day—

Guz.
                                            Cease, cease!
   Be well assured it is not as thou fearst.
   Try to compose thyself: what are thy proofs
   That she has been unfaithful?

Rom.
   No; what a worldly judge would deem unfaithful
   I trust she has not been; but what avails it?
   He whom her fancy follows, he who pleases
   Her secret thoughts and wishes, is her lord,
   Let who will, by the power of legal right,
   Her body hold in thraldom.—Not unfaithful!
   If I have lost her heart, I've suffer'd all.
   No further outrage can enhance my wretchedness.

 Turning quickly and taking hold of him .
   But thou believest that, e'en in this, my fears
   Are mere extravagance.

 Pausing and looking earnestly in his face .
   Dost thou not think so? Dost thou not, Don Guzman?

Guz.
   I hope they are.

Rom.
                                            That hope implies a doubt;
   Ay, and a doubt which, when I saw thee last,
   Did not exist. Speak, speak! If thou mistrust her,
   It is on no slight grounds.

Guz.
   Be more composed, and I will tell thee all.

Rom.
   There's something then to tell; some damned thing.

Guz.
   Nay, think not so; for, when I've told thee all,
   'Twill make no certain proof against Zorada.
   And since thou thinkst her love for thee is changed,
   Caring but for her love, thou mayst the better
   Endure to learn the worst, if such should follow.

Rom.

 in a faint voice .
   I understand thee.

Guz.
                                            Two hours since, perhaps—
   I've been asleep, and cannot say how long—
   But pause we now. Thy quiv'ring lips are white,
   Thine eyes are fix'd: lean upon me, my friend.

Rom.
   A sickly faintness passes o'er my heart.

Guz.

 supporting him to the chair .
   Lean here awhile; thou canst not hear me yet.

Rom.
   I'm better now.

Guz.
                                            But we will pause awhile.

Rom.
   Proceed, proceed! I'll listen, though thy words
   Were each the spik'd tooth of a martyr's wheel.
   Proceed:—Some two hours since—

Guz.
   Some two hours since, as, not disposed to sleep,
   I was perusing that old book of stories,
   I heard, and, as I judged, close to the door,
   Two persons speaking in the gallery.
   The voice of Maurice I could recognise,
   The other was a woman's.



 
Rom.

 starting from the chair .
                                            And Zorada's.

Guz.
   Use not such frantic gestures of despair;
   I say not it was her's: perhaps it was not;
   Perhaps 'twas Donna Beatrice.

Rom.
                                            No, no!
   It was Zorada. Absent from her chamber
   I found her at that time. When she return'd,
   At a late hour, we had some wrangling words,
   Gloz'd o'er, but poorly gloz'd, with female fraud,
   Which soon betray'd itself, and then I left her.

Guz.
   'Tis very strange; and what I heard them say—

Rom.
   Ay, ay! proceed with that; and make no pause
   Till thou hast told the whole, though it should make me
   A very fiend of agony and shame.

Guz.
   Thou grasp'st my throat so hard, I cannot speak.

Rom.
   Well, well, then! Out with all their damned words,
   Till they have proved the blackest tint of guilt,
   And then will come the fatal end of all;
   The sabre clutch'd in strength; the stroke of vengeance;
   The horrible joy, that lasteth for a moment!
   Let all this be; let horror be unstinted!
   Let every misery light upon the head
   Of that most wanton—No, the word would choke me;
   I will not utter it.

Guz.
   Thou art beside thy wits; thou canst not hear me.
   The words they spoke, prove against her, and no one,
   An act of guilt, but only the intent.

Rom.
   Intent! O monstrous! foul deliberation!
   If life-blood warm his heart another day,
   I am bereft, debased, and brutified,
   Unmeet to wear the outward form of manhood.

Guz.
   Wilt thou not hear my story?

Rom.
                                            I have heard it,
   Knowing the cursed purport; ne'ertheless,
   Relate it all, minutely as thou wilt,
   I'll listen to the end.

Guz.
   I drew close to the door, and heard these words
   Distinctly spoken in Don Maurice's voice:—
   “Thou knowst I fear Romiero's apt suspicion;
   “Delay were dangerous; therefore, by the dawn,
   “Meet me beneath the grove of pines, prepared
   “To quit the castle. We will fly together:”—
   Or words to this effect, which indistinctly
   Fell into softer whispers, till, alarm'd,
   As I suppose, they left the gallery.
   'Twas my intent to give thee early notice;
   Therefore I shunn'd that tempting couch, and sought
   Here, in my chair, to snatch a little sleep,
   And be in readiness ere break of day.

Rom.
   Thou hast done well.

 After a pause .
   Come to this pitch of secret profligacy,
   Who was so modest and so timid once!
   Was I a tyrant, that she is so ready,
   To doff the virtuous and respected wife—
   For the base mistress of that minion too?
   Some spell, some devilish witchery, hath subdued her,
   Ere it could come to this.

Guz.
   Ay, so I think, if that in verity
   It be Zorada.

Rom.
                                            O 'tis she! 'tis she!
   Thinkst thou I am a fool to be deceived
   By such affected doubts, in pity utter'd?
   Speak truly, plainly, treat me as a man.
   Call them—yea call that woman, an' thou wilt,—

Guz.
   Fy, fy! Zorada is not yet a—

Rom.

 putting his hand on the lips of Guzman .
                                            Hold!
   Speak not the word; I'm weaker than I thought:
   Is it not near the dawn?

Guz.
   I think 'tis distant still.

Rom.
                                            Surely it is not.
   We'll to the eastern turret, and look forth:
   Should they escape!—My brain burns at the thought.


Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
A grove of pines, and the sky of morning, before sunrise, seen through them. Enter Romiero and Guzman , from a thicket at the bottom of the stage.
Rom.
   The dull light through yon bank of misty clouds
   Hath changed its tanny hue for silver grey;
   'Tis near, 'tis actually, 'tis past the time.

Guz.
   Have patience; for the sun, I guess, is still
   Behind the eastern hills.

Rom.
   Should they escape!—Some cursed emissary,
   Upon the watch, perhaps, hath given alarm.
   Should they escape us by some other path!—
   It must not be: I will look out.

Guz.

 drawing him back to the thicket as he is about to advance .
                                            Keep still.
   I see them now; but let us be conceal'd
   Till they are nearer.

Rom.
                                            They move tardily,
   With their damn'd dalliance.—So very fond
   That they forget the peril of their state,
   Lost in the present bliss.—
   Ay; smile with lips which shall, within an hour,
   Be closed in death; and glance your looks of love


 
   From eyes which shall, ere long, in coldness glare
   Like glassy icicles.

Guz.
                                            Stay; rush not on them now.

Rom.
   See that! see that! her hand, and then her lips!
   Shall I look on, and give another moment
   To such abhorred transport.—Where's my weapon?


 Snatching his sword from Guzman , who attempts to remove it.
Guz.
   Be not a madman in thine ecstasy,
   And foil thine own intent.—See, they advance.


Enter Maurice , leading Beatrice muffled in her mantle.
Maur.
   Come, sweetest mistress mine, move we more quickly;
   Our horses wait us some few paces off;
   And by the baiting hour, when labouring hinds,
   Under some tree, sit round the loosen'd scrip,
   Holding on homely fare a merry feast,
   We will, like them, in all security,
   Enjoy a welcome rest.

Rom.

 rushing forth .
   Which shall to doomsday last, thou damned villain!


 Draws fiercely upon him, while Beatrice runs away. They fight, but she presently returns and rushes between them, favoured by Guzman .
Rom.
   Forbear, thou shameless woman.—Beatrice!

Bea.
   It is, my lord; and O have pity on me!
   It is myself who am the most to blame.
   Pardon my dear, dear Maurice.—Yes, you will.
   Your look of strange amazement, changed to joy,
   Emboldens me—Our hearts have long been join'd;
   O do not sever us!

Rom.
                                            No, simple girl:
   Sever ye! by the holy rood I will not!
   I am right glad that ye are so united.
   Stick to it then; be thrifty of your love,
   To make it last; be doves in constancy.
   Good sooth, young fools! I will not sever ye.

Bea.

 kissing his hand .
   Thanks, noble, kind Romiero!

Maur.
   Thanks for this frank and unexpected pardon!
   I fear'd, my lord, that you might deem it right
   To thwart my suit with Beatrice, who lived,
   Protected, as her friends might haply think,
   Beneath your roof.

Rom.
                                            And thou thoughtst justly too.
   In cooler blood so ought I to have felt.
   Beshrew me! whither fled my wits the while?
   I have most freely given what is not mine.

 To Guzman .
   Do thou, my friend, untie this ravell'd knot.

 Turning again to Maurice .
   I'll plead thy cause, at least, and prove, perhaps,
   A powerful advocate.—Speak to them, Guzman;
   And promise in my name, without reserve,
   All that my honour warrants. I, meantime,
   Must make my peace where I have need of pardon.


 Exit in eager haste .
Maur.
   How placable and kind beyond belief!
   Would I had fairly own'd to him my love,
   Since he is thus inclined! But he appear'd
   Hostile, and stern, and fretful at my stay,
   Unreasonably prolong'd. I had not courage
   To risk my happiness, which his caprice,
   Stern sense of honour—call it as you please—
   Might in a moment blast.

Guz.
   I blame thee not; hadst thou at first declared it,
   Thou wouldst have found him hostile.

Maur.
   Then, pray, Don Guzman, what strange freak hath changed him?

Guz.
   That he is changed, is your good luck; improve it,
   Without inquiring why you are so favour'd.

Maur.
   And so we will, sweet Beatrice; we will
   Delay our happiness, to make it surer.

Bea.
   Yes, Maurice; run no further risk; we'll both
   Return again and bide within the castle.

Guz.
   No; be advised.
 To Beatrice .
Do thou return alone;
   Some foolish freak may yet disturb his mind.
   I know he'll favour Maurice most when absent.

 To Maurice .
   Dost thou not comprehend me?

Maur.
   Not very clearly: jealousy of one
   Whose love is fix'd on an acknowledged mistress,
   So fair, so lovely, were absurd—impossible.

Guz.
   Nay, only say absurd; for there be husbands,
   Ay, lovers too, who, should you cross their way,
   New-mated with the Queen of Love herself,
   And their own dame or mistress were in form
   Black as an Ethiop, would ne'ertheless
   Suspect you of designs against their peace.
   Then wonder not, Zorada being fair,
   If fanciful conceits disturb his brain.

Maur.
   But I'll be circumspect.

Guz.
                                            Go, foolish boy!
   Thy very shadow on the wall will show
   Some indication of sinister wishes.
   School thou the substance as thou wilt. Go, go!
   And be assured I'll prove thy friend when absent,

Maur.

 to Beatrice .
   And must we part?

Bea.
                                            We shall not part for long.

Maur
   No, not for long, sweet maid: beneath thy window
   I'll hold my midnight watch; and when thy casement
   Moves slowly on its hinges, I'll look up,
   And see thy beauty, by the moon's pale light,
   Sending sweet smiles to bless me.—
   When thou walkst forth, I'll in some thicket lurk,
   To see thee pass—perhaps to touch thy robe.
   Wilt thou not give me, dear, before we part,
   Some token of thy love?



 
Bea.
   Yes, gentle Maurice, thou shalt have a token,
   Which every hour thou'lt look upon, and think
   How dear, how true—

Guz.
                                            I'll leave you for awhile
   To settle all this nonsense as you will;
   That done, we'll meet again in yonder alley,
   And I'll conduct the lady to the castle.


 Exeunt severally .
SCENE II.
The apartment of Zorada .— She enters with nurse, who carries a basket in her hand.
Zor.

 speaking as she enters .
   And see, good nurse, that where the cold wind enter'd
   Thou stop the crevice well. Oh! that his head,
   His dear and honour'd head, should so be laid,
   While I am couch'd on down! Thou sayst his face
   Look'd not so sadly as before.

Nurse.
   Indeed I thought so, madam: he spoke cheerily,
   And listen'd to my stories of past days,
   As if he liked to hear them.

Zor.
   Alas! the very sound of human words,
   Address'd to him in peace, is now a solace
   Enjoy'd but rarely.—I must talk and smile,
   And keep my station at the social board,
   While my sad heart is thinking of his silent
   And lonely state.—There is my picture then,
   Since he desires to have it.


 Giving her a picture, which she puts into the basket .
Nurse.
   Yes, madam, he did earnestly desire it.
   He bade me say to you, no lover ever
   Gazed on the features of a plighted mistress
   With such intense and yearning love, as he
   Will gaze upon this image.

Zor.
   Yes; he will look, and think that in return
   It looks with love on him; but woe is me!
   He cannot know how dearly in my heart
   His image is impress'd. I call to mind
   His kind caresses in my infant years;
   His noble form in warlike harness braced,
   When he returning caught me to his heart,
   And heard my simple welcome with delight,
   Filling his eyes with tears. I well remember—
   Dost thou not also, nurse? the voice of fondness
   With which, e'en when I cross'd his graver mood,
   He call'd me little Zada. O 'twas sweet!
   I thought so then; but now it haunts mine ear
   Like portion of some broken melody,
   Which mocking bird is so enamour'd of,
   He will not learn the whole.—And say, good nurse,
   That I will surely see him ere he go,
   If it be possible.
 Exit nurse .

 After a thoughtful pause .

   “My little Zada! tush, my little fool!
   I will not have thee for my playfellow,
   If thou be so perverse.”
   No more than this; this was my worst rebuke.
   He set no heartless stepdame o'er my head,
   Though many ladies strove to win his love.
   He was both sire and mother to his child,
   Gentle as her I lost.
   Then for his sake I'll willingly endure
   The present misery. O, my Romiero!
   Wilt thou not trust my conduct for a day?—
   Absent all night! To what a state of passion
   His brooding fancy must have work'd his mind!
   Alas, alas; 'tis his infirmity.


Enter Romiero .
Rom.
   My dear Zorada! dear, dear wife! thy pardon:
   I crave it on my knees. O pardon one
   Who has offended from excess of love.
   I might have thought all eyes that look'd upon thee,
   With more than admiration look'd; but, Oh!
   To think that thy pure mind could e'er be moved
   To aught which blessed saints might not approve,
   Was monstrous, vile—yea a most vile suggestion—
   Though all the while 'twas an offence of love.
   Thou art amazed, I see, and well thou mayst.
   I have but now discover'd what my fears—

Zor.
   Fears! What hast thou discover'd?

Rom.
   Be not alarm'd; nought that can injure thee.
   For if thou hast been privy to their love,
   Though I might chide thee as a cunning wife,
   Who from her husband hath a secret kept,
   The bane of confidence; yet being myself
   So deep in trespass, I must needs be meek,
   And say thou art not very, very naughty.

Zor.
   Thy words are wild; I do not comprehend them.

Rom.
   Dost thou not know thy fair but thoughtless friend
   Has to young Maurice's suit such favour given,
   That she this morning, short while since, was caught
   Escaping in his company?
   I watch'd and stopp'd them in the grove of pines.
   How glad a sight it was to me, when, wild,
   With terror wild, she rush'd between our weapons
   To find it was but Beatrice!

Zor.
   But Beatrice? whom didst thou fear to find?

Rom.
   Oh! spare me! Crimson shame upon my cheek,
   Betrays too plainly that for which already
   I've craved forgiveness.

Zor.

 drawing herself up proudly .
   Yes, I comprehend thee.

Rom.
   Oh! but that look, that air, that flush of anger
   Which ne'er before so stain'd thy lovely face,
   Speak not of pardon.

 She turns away, and he follows her .
   I have much offended.
   But he who like offence hath ne'er committed:
   Who ne'er hath look'd on man's admiring eye


 
   Fix'd on the treasure of his heart, till fear,
   Suspicion, hatred hath bereft his soul
   Of every generous feeling; he who never
   Hath, in that state of torture, watch'd her face
   Till e'en the traits of saintly innocence
   Have worn the shade of conscious guilt; who never
   Hath, in his agony, for her dear sake
   Cursed all the sex;—may, as the world conceives,
   Be a most wise, affectionate, good husband;
   But, by all ecstacy of soul, by all
   That lifts it to an angel's pitch, or sinks it
   E'en to perdition, he has loved but slightly—
   Loved with a love, that is, compared to mine,
   As cottage hearth where smould'ring embers lie
   To the surcharged unquenchable volcano.

Zor.
   What creed is this which thy perturbed mind
   Repeats so boldly? Good my lord, discard it,
   As a false faith. I have believed true love
   Of such a noble, high, confiding nature,
   That neither scandal's breath, nor seeming show
   Of fitful change, could shake its gen'rous trust.
   'Twere agony for me to think thee false;
   But till thou front me with a rival—yea,
   Till thine own words have own'd that thou art faithless—
   I will believe thee true.

Rom.
   Believe, believe it! and on these dear hands,
   A thousand times caress'd, let me be vow'd
   Ne'er to offend again thy noble nature
   With e'en the slightest movement of suspicion!
   Dost thou relent, Zorada? Dost thou love me?

Zor.
   Indeed I do; have I not often said it?
   And yet, it seems, thou didst mistrust my words.

Rom.
   Fye on that gibe! let me have perfect pardon.

Zor.

 embracing him .
   Thou art forgiven. Now; art thou satisfied?

Rom.
   I were a Tartar else, or sullen Turk.
   Sweet partner, lovely mate, my gentle wife!
   O the soft touch of this dear hand thrills through me,
   So dear! as dear as when thou first wert mine.

 Stroking her hand, and then pressing it to his forehead and cheek .
   If word, or look, or circumstance, again
   E'er tempt me to conceive unworthy thoughts,
   I am a vulgar wretch, debased and mean,
   Unworthy even to look thee in the face,
   Or hold myself akin to virtue. No;
   I will no more offend.
Re-enter Nurse, who is busy arranging her basket, and then looking up, starts on seeing Romiero .

   Nay, start not, worthy nurse; pray thee advance.

Nurse.
   I came—I thought my lady was alone.

Rom.
   And so she is; for we are so united
   In every thought and wish, that thou shouldst reckon
   When with each other, we are still alone.
   Is it not so?—Thou comest for some good purpose,
   I'll swear. To whom bearst thou that tempting fruit?

Nurse.
   To no one, sir; I come to show its beauty; It is my lady's basket.

Rom.
   Thou'st cull'd the best: my lips are parch'd and dry.
   May I—


 Putting his hand to the basket .
Nurse.
   Nay, good my lord, I'll choose you one.

Rom.

 rejecting what she offers .
   Not that: the further peach my fancy pleases.

 Putting his hand into the basket .
   But there be dainty viands and cakes besides!

Zor.
   A charitable dole for age and want.

 Looking to the nurse significantly .
   That is the reason why I bade her show it,
   Ere she should take it to the poor distress'd.

Rom.
   Ha! let me then restore my robbery;
   And here, to make amends.

 Putting money into the basket .
                                            What have we here?

 Taking out a picture .
   Is this a present for your villager?

Nurse.
   Yes, please you.—No, she but desired to see it.

Rom.

 with bitter irony .
   A most refined and sentimental gossip!
   Or does she mean to use it as a charm
   To cure old aching bones?

Nurse.
   You've guess'd it well, my lord. Quoth she to me,
   Could I but see your lady's blessed face!
   Quoth I to her, thou canst not, by good reason:
   My lord is now return'd. Quoth she again,
   Could I but see her picture, lack a day!

Rom.
   Have done: I see thy drift. Be not so eager
   To tell me how it is. I'm satisfied.

Zor.
   Come to my closet, nurse; there is besides
   What I must charge thee with.

 Exeunt Zorada and nurse, the last speaking loudly as she retires .
   Ay, ay, quoth she, poor soul! I have a longing
   To see that picture. Foolish man, quoth I,
   'Tis but a painted—


 Her voice still heard as she retires .
Rom.
   Foolish man, quoth I!—The cunning jade
   Hath made a slip: it was a woman first.

 A pause, and he stands musing and muttering to himself before he speaks aloud, then in a low smothered voice .
                                            Ay, and such thoughts
   Which in the breast had perish'd unreveal'd.
   Are by these cunning beldames brought to utterance.
   Words follow thoughts, acts follow words, and all
   The steps of infamy, from which the mind
   By nature shrinks, are thus familiar made:
   A blighting bane, corroding to their core
   Beauty and innocence.

 Mimicking the voice of a nurse
                                            “My dearest child!
   Thou needst not fear to tell thy thoughts to me;


 
   I know thy tender heart, I know thy fears.”
   Would the whole race were blasted from the earth!
 In his own voice, and stamping on the ground .

Enter Jerome .

   What brings thee here?

Jer.
                                            Old Pietro is below,
   And craves to speak with you.

Rom.
                                            The irksome fool!
   He trows that I am always in the humour
   To hear his prosing proverbs.

Jer.
   He does, my lord; and oft presuming on it,
   Has grown familiar.

Rom.
                                            Art thou his judge?
   Tell him I cannot see him now. To-morrow
   I'll find him in his cottage.

Jer.
   But what he has to tell you, please you, sir,
   He bade me further add is of importance,
   And may not be delay'd.

Rom.
   I'll see him, then, since it must needs be so.


 Exeunt .
SCENE III.
An antechamber. Enter Pietro and a domestic.
Pie.

 speaking as he enters .
   A blessing on thy simple head! impatient!
   I have, good sooth! been wont to speak with him
   As though he were my fellow. Much shrewd counsel
   He hath received from me right pleasantly.
   He looks not grave or proud when poor men speak;
   At least I'm sure he was not so inclined
   Before he married.

Enter Jerome behind him, and listens archly.
                                            Ay, he knows mankind,
   With all their knavish arts; ay, and he knows
   I know them also. Bless the day! full often
   He listen'd to me with a merry face:
   Much shrewd discoursing we have had together.

Jer.

 advancing .
   True, but such shrewd discoursing, as thou callst it,
   Should only upon rainy days take place,
   When idle folk, from field and sport debarr'd,
   Are glad to while away the weary time
   With aught to save the kicking of their heels.

Pie.
   Will he not see me then?

Jer.
                                            I said not so.
   He'll see thee presently; but do not tease him
   With a long-winded tale, choked up with saws;
   He is not in the humour for it now.
   It would, to say the least on't, be a present
   More prized by him who gives than who receives it.

Pie.
   Go to! I have no need of thee to school me:
   I know as well as thou dost when to speak,
   And when to hold my tongue.


Enter Romiero and Guzman , and the domestics withdraw.
Rom.
   Good morrow, Pietro! thou wouldst speak with me.

Pie.
   Yes, please your honour, I'm a simple man;—
   That is to say, I am not school'd or learn'd
   As many be, who set great store by it;
   But yet I think I can, as well as others,
   Scent mischief in its covert. Ah, good lack!
   This is a wicked world.

Rom.
                                            I know it well.
   Thou'st told me so a thousand times, good Pietro.
   What is the matter now? Rehearse it briefly,
   And plainly too, my friend: enough of comment
   Will follow after. Speak,—what is the matter?

Pie.
   Ay, something is the matter, take my word for't.
   For there be ill enough in this sad world,—
   In court and cot, in city and in village.

Rom.

 interrupting him impatiently .
   There is among your villagers, I hear,
   A person much afflicted.

Pie.
   We were all well, both young and old of us,
   When I left home scarce half an hour since. No;
   My story is of other matters; villagers
   Are not therein concerned, unless it be
   As hired emissaries: for, I trow,
   No wealthy devil e'er lack'd poorer imp.
   No rich man ever wants—

Rom.
                                            A truce with proverbs!
   What is it thou wouldst tell me?

Pie.
   Marry, that mischief, in or near your castle,
   Is hatching secretly.

Rom.
                                            Why dost thou think so?

Pie.
   A ghost was seen by some benighted fools,
   As they report it, near the ancient chapel,
   Where light pour'd through the trees, and strangely vanish'd
   They know not how. I much suspect your ghosts.
   'Tis said they're ominous of death; but weddings,
   Or worse than weddings oft'ner follow after.
   You have a rich and beauteous ward: Don Maurice
   Is young, ambitious, and cunning:—No!
   It is no ghastly spectre haunts your woods.

Rom.
   Was it a female form those fools beheld?

Pie.
   Yes, by Saint Jago! and it wore, they say,
   Donna Zorada's air, who is, you know,
   Not much unlike, in size and gait, to Beatrice.

Guz.
   We know all this already, worthy Pietro;
   Nought ill will follow it; be thou content.

Rom.
   If Beatrice hath in the shades of night
   Gone forth to meet her lover, she hath err'd
   Beyond what we believed.
 Calling loud .
Ho! Jerome there!
Re-enter Jerome .

   Thou wert the secret agent of Don Maurice;
   In this thou'st sinn'd against thy master! Say,


 
   And I'll forgive thee all if thou speak truly,
   Did Donna Beatrice e'er, by night, steal forth
   To meet him in the forest?

Jer.
   No, good my lord; that I will answer truly;
   She never did.

Rom.
                                            Good Pietro tells a story
   Of frighten'd villagers, who have, at night,
   Seen wand'ring in the wood a female form.
   Thou seem'st confused; thou, too, hast heard of this?

Jer.
   Not heard of it, my lord.

Rom.
                                            Then thou hast seen it.

Jer.
   I must confess I saw a form, last night,
   Glide hastily before me, through the wood:
   The face I could not see.

Rom.
                                            It was a woman?

Jer.
   It was, my lord.

Rom.
                                            Its stature tall or short?

Jer.
   Neither, my lord.

Pie.
                                            Did I not say it seem'd—

Guz.

 pulling Pietro back .
   Hush, thou art wise, and shouldst not waste thy words.

Rom.

 to Jerome .
   Did it resemble any female figure
   Familiar to thine eye? Why dost thou hesitate?
   Speak truth; speak freely; think not to deceive me:
   Seem'd it a form familiar to thine eye?

Jer.
   I was confused—I knew not. No, my lord,
   It was no well-known form.

Rom.
                                            Thy words are false!

 Walks perturbedly to and fro, then returning to them .
   Why stand ye here to gaze upon me? Go!

Guz.

 to Pietro .
   Retire, and do not speak to him again.
   Save thee, good Pietro; and thou, too, Jerome.

 Exeunt Pietro and Jerome .  Going up to Romiero .
   Thou art bereft of reason. In the dark
   A gliding form is seen, nor tall, nor short,
   Nor having any mark by which to prove
   It is, or is not any woman breathing;
   And thou in thy diseased conceit hast shaped—

Rom.
   Thou speakst in ignorance: I have good cause—
   Cause which thou knowst not of. I'll tell thee more
   When I have breath to speak.—
   My dame, my wife, she whom I made my wife,
   Hath secret myst'ries—hath a beldame nurse—
   Hath one conceal'd to whom she sends—O shame!—
   Outrageous, frontless shame! the very picture
   Which I have gazed upon a thousand times,
   Tears in my eyes, and blessings on my lips.
   How little thought I once—vain, vain remembrance!
   It is a thing most strange if she be honest.

Guz.
   How strange?—that thou thyself shouldst be deceived
   As many men have been, which is a marvel
   Of daily note, amongst the sons of Adam?

Rom.
   Deceived! be there witch-powder in mine eyes,
   To make that seen which is not; in mine ears,
   To make them hear false sounds? I've seen; I've heard:
   I am deluded by no gossip's tale.—
   O would I were! I loved—I worshipp'd her;
   She was the thing that stirr'd within my soul,
   Which had no other life. Despise me not;
   For tears will force their way.—She was to me—
   When I have power to speak, I'll tell thee all.

Guz.
   Yes; pause awhile, my friend. Thou art too vehement.

Rom.

 lowering his voice .
   Have they o'erheard me? Has it come to this,
   That such as they should know my misery?
   I will match wiles with wiles, and borrow of her
   That damn'd hypocrisy. Come thou with me,
   And give me counsel: thou thyself wilt own
   It is no weak conceit disturbs me thus.
   But stop, and stand aside.


 Stops on seeing nurse pass by a low window on the outside .
Guz.
                                            What wouldst thou now?

Rom.
   Here comes the beldame nurse of whom I spoke;
   Returning from her mission, as I guess.
   Stand thou aside whilst I engage with her,
   And, with her own deceits, deceive the witch.
   Do thou observe her visage as I speak.

Guz.
   Nay; trust not to deceit; for at this moment
   Thou hast not o'er thyself as much control
   As would deceive the simplest soul on earth.
   She will outwit thee; leave the task to me,
   And do thou stand aside.—I hear her steps.
Enter Nurse, while Romiero goes behind the arras.

   Ha! my good nurse; thou art a stirring person,
   And one of service in this family,
   If I mistake it not. How could fair damsels,
   And dainty dames, and other tender souls,
   Endure the thraldom of stern lords and masters,
   Brothers, and jealous guardians, and the like,
   Were it not for such useful friends as thou?

Nurse.
   I know not what you mean by service, sir;
   I serve my mistress honestly and fairly.

Guz.
   And secretly, when it must needs be so.
   Do I not know it well, and well approve
   Thy wary vigilance? Take this broad piece;

 giving gold 
   A token of respect for all thy virtues.
   Thou art, I know, the agent of Zorada
   In all her secret charities: how fares it
   With that poor invalid?

Nurse.
                                            What invalid?

Guz.
   To whom thou tookst that basket of fair fruit.


 
   Let me attend thee when thou goest again;
   I have some skill in med'cine.

Nurse.
   I thank you, sir; I have some skill myself,
   And that suffices. She will soon be well.

Guz.
   It is a woman, then.—Look in my face:
   Look at me steadfastly.—I know it is not.
   It is a man; ay, and a man for whom
   Thy lady hath some secret, dear regard.
   And so, perhaps, hast thou: where is the harm?

Nurse.
   And if there be, where is the harm of loving
   Those near akin to us?

Guz.
   Yes, fairly said! Who can find harm in that?

Nurse.
   Whom should we love—I mean, whom should I love,
   But mine own flesh and blood?

Guz.
   Thy flesh and blood! lies flesh and blood of thine
   So near us, and conceal'd?—A son, perhaps?

Nurse.
   I have a son; but where he is conceal'd,
   Or far, or near, I know not.

Guz.
   Nay, nay, good nurse; think of next month's confession,
   When lying must be paid for. Father Thomas
   For a small penance will not let thee off.


 Here Romiero appears from behind the arras, with gestures of impatience, but draws back again .
Guz.
   Knowst thou not where he is, this son of thine?
   A handsome youth, no doubt.

Nurse.
   As ever stepp'd upon the blessed earth.
   When but an infant, he with fair Zorada
   Play'd like a brother. Such a pretty pair!
   And the sweet children loved each other dearly.
   Would he were here! but where he is I know not.

Rom.

 bursting out upon her .
   Vile wretch! thou liest; but thou shalt tell the truth.
   I'll press the breath from out thy cursed body,
   Unless thou tell me where thy son is hid.

Nurse.
   My son, my lord!

Rom.
                                            Ay, witch; I say thy son;
   The ugliest hound the sun e'er looked upon.
   Tell me, and instantly, if thou wouldst breathe
   Another moment. Tell me instantly.


 Shaking her violently, while Guzman interposes, and Romiero , struggling with him, falls to the ground, and nurse escapes off the stage .
Guz.

 endeavouring to raise him .
   I pray thee, pardon me, my noble friend!
   When passion led thee to disgrace thyself,
   This was an act of friendship.—Rise, Romiero.

Rom.
   No; here upon the ground, my bed of agony,
   I will remain. Sunk to this deep disgrace,
   The centre of the earth were fitter for me
   Than its fair surface, and the light of heaven.
   Oh! this exceeds the worst imagination
   That e'er found entrance to this madden'd brain!
   That he—this hateful, vulgar, shapeless creature— Fy, fy.

Guz.
   If thou canst harbour such a thought,
   Thou art in verity beside thyself.
   It is not possible that such a one
   Could please Zorada, were she e'en unfaithful.

Rom.

 rising fiercely .
   Not please her! every thing will please a woman
   Who is bereft of virtue, gross, debased.
   Yea, black deformity will be to her
   A new and zestful object.


Enter Zorada behind him.
Guz.

 making her a sign to retire .
   O lady! come not here.

Zor.
   I heard Romiero loud; what is the matter?

Rom.
   O nothing, madam; pray advance. O nothing!
   Nothing that you should be surprised to hear.
   That ladies can be fair and delicate,
   And to the world's eye e'en as saints devout,
   Yet all the while be coarse, debased, and stain'd
   With passions that disgrace the vulgar kmd.

Zor.
                                            Alas! what mean you?

Rom.
   Thou'st played me false; thou art a worthless woman;
   So base, so sunk, that those whose appellation
   Brings blushes to the cheeks of honest women
   Compared to thee are pure.—Off! do not speak!
   It is a sick'ning sight to look upon thee,
   Fair as thou art. Feign not to be surprised:
   Begone, I say, I cannot for a moment
   Say what I may not do.

 Taking his dagger from his side, and giving it to Guzman , who snatches it hastily from him .
   Now thou art safe; but go, thou shameless creature

Guz.
   Madam, I pray you go, for he is furious,
   And would not listen to a saint from heaven.

 Exit Zorada , wringing her hands .
   Come, leave this spot, Romiero; some few hours,
   I am persuaded, will reveal this mystery.
   Meantime, let me constrain thee as a friend;
   Thou art not fit to speak or act with reason.

Rom.
   Thinkst thou to bind and lead me like a maniac?

Guz.
   Like what thou art: but here comes Beatrice.
   Wouldst thou to her expose thy sorry state?


Enter Beatrice .
Rom.
   To her or any one, what boot they now,
   Fair seemings and fair words?

Bea.
                                            Are you not well, my lord?

Rom.
   No, damsel; well was banish'd from the world,
   When woman came to it.

Bea.
                                            Fy! say not so.
   For if deprived of women, what were men?
   Like leafless elms stripp'd of the clasping vine;
   Like unrigg'd barks, of sail and pennant bare;


 
   Like unstring'd viols, which yield no melody.
   Banish us all, and lay my life upon it,
   You will right quickly send for us again.

Rom.
   Ay, as for parrots, jays, and kirtled apes,
   To make vain sport withal. It makes me sick
   To think of what you seem and what you are.

Bea.
   But say not all , because there are a few.

Guz.
   Fair lady, hold no further parley now.

 To Rom .
   And come with me, my friend.


 Exeunt Romiero and Guzman .
Bea.

 looking after him .
   What strange tormenting fancy haunts him now?
   She leads a life worse than an Eastern slave,
   Who weds with such as he. Save me from that!


Enter Maurice by the window, having previously peeped in to see if she were alone.
Maur.
   Dear Beatrice! to find thee thus alone—

Bea.
   Good heaven preserve us! What has brought thee back?

Maur.
   To see and hear thee, love, and yet again
   To touch thy fair soft hand.

Bea.
                                            An errand, truly,
   To make thee track thy steps so many miles!

Maur.
   An errand worth the toil e'en ten times told.
   To see thy figure moving in thy veil,
   Is worth a course of five good miles at least;
   To see thy glowing face of welcome is,
   At lowest reck'ning, worth ten score of leagues
   By sea or land; and this soft thrilling pressure,—
   O! 'tis worth all the leagues that gird the globe.


 Taking her hand .
Bea.
   What idle words! how canst thou be so foolish?
   I needs must chide thee for it, thoughtless boy!

Maur.
   Chide me, indeed, who am two years thy elder,
   And two good months to boot!—Such high pretension!
   Have sixteen summers and a woman's robe
   Made thee so very wise and consequential?

Bea.

 giving him two mock blows on his shoulder .
   Take that, and that, for such discourteous words.

Maur.

 catching both her hands and kissing them separately .
   Ay, marry will I, and right gladly too,
   When this and this are added to the gift.

Bea.
   Forbear such idle rapture, 'tis a folly:
   So tell me truly what has brought thee back
   To this disturb'd and miserable house.

Maur.
   What, miserable still? Not yet convinced
   That thou, and not Zorada, art the queen
   Of my impassion'd heart?

Bea.
                                            Of this, indeed,
   He is convinced; but what doth it avail?
   Some other fancy, yet I know not what,
   Again possesses him. Therefore depart;
   Quickly depart, nor linger longer here,
   When thou hast told me wherefore thou art come.

Maur.
   When some way off, it came into my head
   That Don Romiero—the occasion past,
   Which has excited him to favour us—
   May be remiss, or may repent his promise.
   I therefore quickly turned my horse's head,
   Nor drew I bridle till within the forest
   I found me once again, close to the postern.

Bea.
   What wouldst thou do? for in his present state
   Thou mayst not speak to him.

Maur.
   But I would speak to Guzman; he has power
   To keep Romiero steadfast in his promise.
   I should have thought of this before I went,
   And urged him earnestly that no remissness
   With thy relations may retard our bliss.

Bea.
   Are we not happy now? Is marriage bliss?
   I fear to think of it.

Maur.
                                            Why shouldst thou fear?
   Shall I be jealous? O, my gentle Beatrice!
   I never will believe thee false to me,
   Until such proof as that heaven's sun is bright
   Shall flash upon me, and the agony
   Will be my death-blow and prevent upbraiding.

Bea.
   And art thou, then, so tender in thy nature?
   In truth it makes me weep to think thou art.

Maur.
   Let me wipe off those tears, my gentle love.
   Think hopefully and cheerfully, I pray thee.
   I feel within my breast a strong assurance
   Thou never wilt prove false, nor I suspicious.
   Where may I find Don Guzman?


 Exeunt .
ACT V. SCENE I.
The scene dark; the forest. Enter Jerome and another domestic, by opposite sides of the stage.
Jer.
   Hast thou seen any thing?

Dom.
   No; but I spy a distant moving light
   Far to the left.

Jer.
   Then run and see who bears it.

 Exit domestic .
   Here come my lord and Guzman, slow and silent.
   Surely they have not seen it; and, perhaps,
   My comrade is deceived.


Enter Romiero and Guzman .
Rom.
   Ha! Jerome! is it thou!

Jer.
                                            It is, my lord:



 
Rom.
   Hast thou seen aught? hast thou heard any sound?

Jer.
   Nothing, my lord.

Rom.
                                            Yet still be on the watch:
   Revisit every path; let nought escape thee.

Jer.
   No, nothing shall. I'll use both eyes and ears
   Intently; nothing shall unnoted be.
   An owlet shall not turn him in his nest
   But I shall be aware of it, nor hare
   Scud 'cross the path without my observation.

Rom.
   Well, say no more: I trust thee. To thy duty!


 Exit Jerome .
Guz.
   I am persuaded we shall range this wood
   The livelong night, nor meet with any thing
   But such small denizens as Jerome mention'd,
   Or these benighted trees that skirt our path,
   So black and motionless.

Rom.
   Oh! if the light of day return again,
   Nought being found to justify my fears,
   I'll hail it as the wretch whose op'ning dungeon
   Receives the light, as through its portal passes
   Some glad friend, bearing his reprieve. Oh, Guzman!
   The felon, chain'd to meet his shameful doom,
   Hath not more agony of thought, nor starteth
   With greater horror from the brink of death,
   Than I do from that moment of despair
   Which shall make manifest the thing I dread.

Guz.
   I trust that moment never will arrive.

Rom.
   Dost thou, my friend? dost thou, in very truth?
   I bless thee for that noble confidence:
   Would I could feel it too! Repeat thy words.

Guz.
   I do believe that moment will not come.

Rom.
   No, no! it was not thus: thy words are changed;
   Thy tone of voice is changed; thoughts of recoil
   Pass o'er thy mind, and turn their force to weakness.
   Thou dost not trust,—no, nor believe it neither.

Guz.
   Indeed, I think—I hope thou art deceived.

Rom.
   Shame on such timid tamp'ring with my passion,
   Provoking it the more! If she be guilty,
   I am prepared with dreadful preparation.
   If she be innocent,—tears choke my voice:
   To say, “if she be innocent!”—
   Her look, her smile, her easy lightsome gait,—
   She was th'embodied form of innocence;
   The simple sweetness of a cottage child,
   Join'd to a lady's grace.

Guz.
   Hers seem'd, indeed, the loveliness of virtue.

Rom.
   Even so; but that is changed. She cannot now
   So look, so smile, so step; for if she could,
   I should defy all proof of circumstance
   To move me to suspicion.

Guz.
   Nay, good Romiero, know thy nature better,
   A circumstance as trivial as the glance
   Or meaning smile of some young varlet page
   Would tempt thee to suspect a saint of heaven.
   But cease debate; your scout returns in haste.


Enter Domestic.
Dom.
   My lord, they're in the wood: I've seen them.

Rom.
                                            Whom?

Dom.
   The nurse, my lord, went first, and close behind her
   Donna Zorada stole like one afraid.

Rom.

 seizing him by the throat .
   Hell choke thy blasted breath, thou croaking fiend!
   Thou darest not say 'twas she.

Dom.
   I did not say so, certainly.

Rom.
                                            Thou didst.

Dom.
   I spoke unwittingly; I will unsay it.

Rom.

 casting him away from him with violence .
   And be a damned liar for thy pains.
   All that my darkest fancy had conceived!
   Uncover'd shame, degrading infamy!—
   Come quick, unstinted, terrible revenge!
   If the base wantons live another hour,
   I am as base as they.

Guz.
   Be not a maniac: think before thou act,—
   Before thou do what cannot be undone.

Rom.
   Think ere I act! Cool, sober, gentle friend!
   Hadst thou not better say, “Good sir, be patient.
   Thy wife is faithless, and her minion bless'd;
   But pray, good sir, be patient.”—Oh, my heart!
   The seat of life will burst ere it be done:
   Hold, hold till then!
 To domestic .
Where were they? near the castle?

Dom.
   No; in the beechen grove beyond the chapel,
   To which we did suspect their steps were bent,
   Taking, no doubt, that further winding path
   The better to avoid detection.—See,
   There's light now faintly peering from its window.
   They must be there already.
 To Guzman .
Look, Don Guzman!

Guz.
   I do; it vanishes and re-appears,
   And vanishes again, and all is dark.

Rom.
   Yes; all shall soon be dark:
   That flame of guilt, those glow-worms of the night,
   That bright deceitful sheen of foul corruption,
   Shall be extinct, trod out, earth bray'd with earth.
   Which of these paths leads to th' accursed spot?

 Rushing into a path, and then turning back and taking another .
   I am bewilder'd! this will lead me right.


 Exit .
Guz.
   We must pursue his steps, and try, if possible,
   To keep his unrein'd ire from desp'rate acts.


 Exeunt .

Enter, by the opposite side, Beatrice and her woman.
Bea.
   He should be here, or somewhere near this spot.


 
   I am afraid in these dark forest paths.
   Each crooked leafless stump or dwarfish bush
   Seems beast or man prepared to pounce upon us;
   And then to make a vain and short amends,
   Each slender, graceful sapling is my Maurice.
   I dare not venture further.

Woman.
   Perhaps we're wrong, and have mista'en the place;
   Let us turn back, and try some other alley!

Bea.
   Turn not; I hear his foot.


 Listening .
Woman.
   My ears then must be dull, for I hear nothing.

Bea.
   Yes, they are dull; thou hast not in thy heart
   That which doth quicken mine.—It is his footstep;
   I know it well!

Woman.
   Indeed, I should have guess'd—

Bea.
                                            Nay, hush, Theresa;
   I love to bend mine ear and listen to it.

 Listens again as before, and presently enter Maurice .
   Is't thou, my friend?

Maur.
                                            Yes, dearest; further on
   I waited for thee, and became impatient.

Bea.
   How glad I am to hear thy voice again!

Maur.
   What hast thou done? How hast thou sped with Guzman?
   Since thou wouldst take that office on thyself,
   I trust thy parley with him was successful.

Bea.
   As heart could wish, although it was but short.
   He'll be our friend, and keep Romiero so;
   And will, besides, to my stern uncle speak,
   Who, as thou knowst—But here comes one in haste.


Enter Jerome .
Jer.
   Remain no longer here; for Don Romiero,
   And Guzman with him, wanders through the wood;
   You may encounter him in any path.

Maur.
   What shall we do?

Jer.
                                            Be still, and follow me,
   And I will lead you to a safer spot,
   Free from intrusion, near the ruin'd chapel.


 Exeunt .
SCENE II.
The inner porch of a ruined chapel. Enter Nurse and a Sea Captain, meeting.
Nurse.
   Are all things ready then?

Capt.
                                            The breeze is faint,
   But it is fair; my seamen are on board;
   We shall weigh anchor by the early dawn,
   And bear us out to sea. Go, tell my passenger
   To join us presently upon the beach.

Nurse.
   I will, good captain: 'tis no thoughtless youth,
   Who trows the very winds should wait his bidding;
   He will be punctual. He hath seen good days,
   Although I may not tell thee who he is.

Capt.
   Nor do I ask thee.

Nurse.
                                            He hath seen good days,
   And evil too, and hath been buffeted
   By wayward fate.

Capt.
                                            Good mother, so have I.
   But what of that? The foul, the fair will blow,
   And we must weather it even as we may.
   Speak not in such a lamentable tone;
   I will be kind to him.

Nurse.
                                            I hope thou wilt.
   Heaven will reward thee, and Saint Jago too.

Capt.
   Tut, woman! wherefore make so much ado
   About some kindness to a fellow sinner?
   I shall expect him ere the morning break;
   And give him notice, for the time is near.


 Exit .
Nurse

 alone .
   I will not yet break on their sad farewell,
   But in the outer porch remain on watch.
   Ah, woe the day! that they must thus, by stealth,
   Take their last leave. I fear 'twill be their last.


 Exit .
SCENE III.
An old Gothic chapel: Sebastian and Zorada are discovered in earnest conversation.
Seb.
   And wilt thou bear these lessons in thy mind?

Zor.
   I shall forget to say my daily prayers
   When I forget to think of thee, dear father!
   And, when I think of thee, thy words of kindness,
   And words of counsel too, shall be remember'd.

Seb.
   Sweet child! stand back and let me look upon thee.
   Ay; so she look'd. O! it is sweet in thee
   To look so like thy mother, when mine eyes
   Must take their last impression, as a treasure
   Here
 his hand on his heart 
to be cell'd for ever. Many looks
   Thy varying face was wont to wear, yet never,
   But in some sad or pensive mood, assumed
   The likeness of that countenance;—to me
   Thy loveliest look; though, to all other eyes,
   Thy mother's beauty never equall'd thine.

Zor.
   I still remember her: the sweetest face
   That e'er I look'd upon. I oft recall it,
   And strive to trace the features more distinctly.

Seb.
   Be good as she was; and when I am gone,
   Never again let myst'ry and concealment,
   Tempting the weakness of thy husband's nature,
   Which but for this were noble, break the peace
   And harmony of marriage.—For this oath—
   This fatal oath—he was constrain'd to take it.
   Then so consider it, nor let it rankle
   Within thy gentle breast: that were perverse.
   When I am gone, all will again be well,
   And I will write to thee and comfort thee.


 
   Our minds shall still hold intercourse, dear Zada,
   And that should satisfy.

Zor.
                                            Alas! alas!
   When I shall read thy letters, my poor heart
   Will but the more yearn after thee, dear father!
   And pine to see thee. Suffer me to hope
   That we shall meet again.—Call it not vain,
   But suffer me to think—
Enter Nurse in alarm.

                                            What is the matter?

Nurse.
   You are discover'd: Don Romiero comes;
   I heard his voice approaching through the trees.
   I heard the hollow tread of many feet.

Zor.

 to Sebastian .
   O fly! farewell!

Seb.
                                            Farewell, my dearest child!
   Heaven bless and guard thee ever! O farewell!


 Embraces her, and exit .
Zor.
   If he should be discover'd!

Nurse.
                                            Fear it not.
   He knows the nearest path, and on the beach
   The captain will receive him. Ere 'tis light,
   He will be safely in the vessel lodged.
   O all good saints of heav'n! he's here already.


Enter Romiero .
Rom.
   Most wretched and degraded woman! Now
   Thy shameful secret is discover'd. Now,
   Vice unveiled and detestable must have
   Its dreadful recompense. Where is thy minion?

Zor.
   O cease! you frighten me with such fierce looks.
   I have done thee no wrong.

Rom.
   Provoke me not with oft-repeated words,
   Which I do know are false as his who fell
   Apostate and accursed. Where is thy minion?

 In a still louder voice, and stamping on the ground .
   Tell me without delay: speak briefly, truly,
   If thou hast hope to live another hour.

Zor.
   O pity, pity! be not so enraged!
   Thou shalt be told the truth a few hours hence;
   Then, to that time, detest me as thou wilt,
   But spare my life.


Re-enter Sebastian , while Romiero has, in his rage, stridden to the front of the stage. Zorada , uttering a shriek, runs to her father, and throws her veil over his face, endeavouring to push him back.
Seb.
   What! fly and leave thee in a madman's power?
   I heard his stormy voice, and could not leave thee.


 Romiero turns round, and, running furiously at them, stabs Zorada in aiming at Sebastian; Guzman , who enters in alarm, followed by Maurice and Beatrice , endeavouring, in vain, to prevent him .
Guz.
   Hold! hold! thou wilt not strike a cover'd foe!

Zor.

 still clinging round her father .
   Strike me again; I will not quit my hold.
   I'll cling to him; within my dying grasp
   I'll hold him safe: thou wilt not kill him there.


 Sinking to the ground, while the veil drops from the face of Sebastian .
Rom.
   Her father!

Zor.
                                            Yes; my father, dear Romiero!
   Thou wilt not slay us both. Let one suffice!
   Thou lovedst me once; I know thou lovest me now;
   Shall blood so dear to thee be shed in vain?
   Let it redeem my father!—I am faint,
   Else I would kneel to thee.


 Endeavouring to kneel, but prevented and supported by nurse and Beatrice .
Nurse.
   Do not, dear murder'd child!

Bea.
   My dear, dear friend, forbear. He heeds thee not.

Guz.
   Romiero, dost thou hear her sad request?

Rom.
   I hear your voices murm'ring in mine ear
   Confused and dismal. Words I comprehend not.
   What have I done? Some dreadful thing, I fear.
   It is delusion this! she is not slain:
   Some horrible delusion.

Zor.

 aside to Sebastian .
   Fly, fly, dear father, while he is so wild.
   He will not know and will not follow thee.

Seb.
   No, dearest child! let death come when it will,
   I'll now receive it thankfully. Romiero,
   Thou wretched murd'rer of thy spotless wife—
   Romiero de Cardona!

Rom.
   Who is it calls me with that bitter voice?

 Gazing on him; and then with a violent gesture of despair .
   I know thee;—yes, I know what I have done.

Guz.
   Forbear such wild and frantic sorrow now,
   And speak to her while she is sensible,
   And can receive thy words. She looks on thee,
   And looks imploringly.

Rom.
   Zorada, my Zorada! spotless saint!
   I lov'd thee far beyond all earthly things,
   But demons have been dealing with my soul,
   And I have been thy tyrant and destroyer,
   A wretch bereft of reason.

Bea.
   She makes a sign as if she fain would speak,
   But her parch'd tongue refuses.
 To Maurice .
Fetch some water
   To moisten those dear lips and cool that brow.

 Exit Maurice .
   She strives again to speak.

Rom.

 stooping over her. 
   What wouldst thou say?
   What means that gentle motion?

Zor.
   Come close to me; thou'rt pardon'd, love, thou'rt pardoned.

Rom.
   No, say that I am blasted, ruin'd, cursed,
   Hateful to God and man.


Re-enter Maurice with water, which she tastes.
Zor.
   Thou art not cursed; O no! then be more calm.


 

 Endeavouring to raise herself up .
   Look here; he is my father: think of that.
   Thou'rt pardoned, love; thou'rt pardoned.

Rom.
   She call'd me love . Did she not call me so?

Guz.
   Yes, most endearingly.

Rom.
   And she is gone, and I have murder'd her!

 Throws himself on the body, moaning piteously; then starts up in despair, and looks furiously at Sebastian .
   Thou restless, selfish, proud, rebellious spirit!
   Thy pride has work'd our ruin, been our bane;
   The bane of love so bless'd! Draw, wretched man!
   I've sworn an oath, which I will sacred hold,
   That when Sebastian and myself should meet,
   He should to royal justice be deliver'd,
   Or, failing that, one of the twain should die.


 Drawing his sword fiercely upon him .
Guz.

 holding him back .
   Hold, madman, hold! thy rage is cruel, monstrous,
   Outraging holy nature.

Rom.

 breaking from him. 
   Off! thinkst thou to restrain or bind despair
   With petty strength like thine?—Proud rebel, draw!
   I am thy daughter's murderer, and thou
   Destroyer of us both.

Seb.
   Yes, Don Romiero, we are match'd in ruin,
   And we will fight for that which cures despair.
   He who shall gain it is the conqueror.


 They fight, each exposing himself rather than attacking his adversary .
Rom.
   No; to't in earnest, if thou wouldst not have me
   Deliver thee a felon to the law.
   Defend thine honour, though thou scorn thy life!

 They fight again, and Romiero falls .
   I thank thee, brave Sebastian: O forgive
   Harsh words that were but meant to urge contention.
   Thou'rt brave and noble; so my heart still deem'd thee,
   Though, by hard fate, compelled to be thy foe.—
   Come hither, Guzman: thou hast sworn no oath.
   Give me thy hand; preserve Sebastian's life,
   And lay me in the grave with my Zorada.


 The curtain drops .


THE BEACON: A SERIOUS MUSICAL DRAMA, IN TWO ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Ulrick , lord of the island.

Ermingard .

Bastiani , friend of Ulrick .

Garcio , friend of Ermingard .

Page.

Pope's Legate.

Knights of St. John of Jerusalem.

Fishermen, singers, attendants of the Legate, &c.

WOMEN Aurora .

Terentia , a noble lady, and gouvernante to Aurora .

Viola , lady attending on Aurora .

Edda , lady attending on Aurora .



Scene, a small island of the Mediterranean. Time, towards the middle of the th century.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A grove adjoining to a castellated building, part of which only is seen. Several people are discovered near the window of one of its towers who begin to sing as the curtain draws up.
Song of several voices.
   Up! quit thy bower, late wears the hour;
   Long have the rooks caw'd round thy tower;
   On flower and tree, loud hums the bee;
   The wilding kid sports merrily:
   A day so bright, so fresh, so clear,
   Shineth when good fortune's near.

   Up! lady fair, and braid thy hair,
   And rouse thee in the breezy air;
   The lulling stream, that sooth'd thy dream,
   Is dancing in the sunny beam:
   And hours so sweet, so bright, so gay,
   Will waft good fortune on its way.

   Up! time will tell; the friar's bell
   Its service sound hath chimed well;
   The aged crone keeps house alone,
   And reapers to the fields are gone;
   The active day, so boon and bright,
   May bring good fortune ere the night.

Enter Page.
Page.
   Leave off your morning songs, they come too late;
   My lady hath been up these two good hours,
   And hath no heart to listen to your lays!
   You should have cheer'd her sooner.

 st sing.
   Her nightly vigils make the evening morn.
   And thus we reckon'd time.

Page.
                                            Well, go ye now;
   Another day she'll hear your carols out.


 Exeunt page and singers severally, by the bottom of the stage, while Ulrick and Terentia enter by the front, speaking as they enter.
Ul.
   Thou pleadst in vain: this night shall be the last.

Ter.
   Have patience, noble Ulrick; be assur'd,
   Hope, lacking nourishment, if left alone,
   Comes to a natural end. Then let Aurora,
   Night after night, upon the lofty cliff,
   Her beacon watch: despondency, ere long,
   Will steal upon the sad unvaried task.

Ul.
   Sad and unvaried! Ay; to sober minds
   So doth it seem indeed. I've seen a child,
   Day after day, to his dead hedgeling bring
   The wonted mess, prepared against its waking,
   'Till from its putrid breast each feather dropt:
   Or on the edge of a clear stream hold out
   His rod and baitless line from morn till noon,
   Eyeing the spotted trout, that past his snare
   A thousand times hath glided, till by force
   His angry dame hath dragg'd him from his station.
   Hope is of such a tough continuous nature,
   That, waiting thus its natural end, my life
   Shall to a close wear sadly. Patience, sayst thou!
   I have too long been patient.

Ter.
   Then be it known to thee, despondency
   Already steals upon her; for she sits not
   So oft as she was wont upon the beach,
   But in her chamber keeps in sombre silence;
   And when the night is come, less eagerly
   She now inquires if yet the beacon's light
   Peer down the woody pass, that to the cliff
   Nightly conducts her toilsome steps. I guess,
   Soon of her own accord she'll watch no more.

Ul.
   No, thou unwisely guessest. By that flame
   I do believe some spirit of the night
   Comes to her mystic call, and soothes her ear
   With whisper'd prophecies of good to come.



 
Ter.
   In truth, my lord, you do yourself talk strangely.
   These are wild thoughts.

Ul.
                                            Nay, be thou well assur'd,
   Spell-bound she is: night hath become her day;
   On all wild songs, and sounds, and ominous things
   Shunning the sober intercourse of friends
   Such as affliction courts, her ear and fancy
   Do solely dwell. This visionary state
   Is foster'd by these nightly watchings; therefore,
   I say again, I will no more endure it;
   This night shall be the last.

Ter.
   That Ermingard upon the plains of Palestine
   Fell on that fatal day, what sober mind
   Can truly doubt; although his corpse, defaced,
   Or hid by other slain, was ne'er discover'd.
   For well I am assured, had he survived it,
   Knowing thou wert his rival, and Aurora
   Left in this isle, where thou bearst sov'reign sway,
   He, with a lover's speed, had hasten'd back.
   All, whom the havoc of the battle spared,
   Have to their homes return'd.—Thou shak'st thy head,
   Thou dost not doubt?

Ul.
                                            We'll speak of this no more.
   I'm sick and weary of these calculations.
   We must and will consider him as dead;
   And let Aurora know—


Enter Bastiani .

 To Bast . angrily. 
   Why, Bastiani,
   Intrud'st thou thus, regardless of my state:
   These petty cares are grown most irksome to me;
   I cannot hear thee now.

Bast.
   Indeed, my lord, it is no petty care
   Compels me to intrude. Within your port
   A vessel from the Holy Land has moor'd.

Ul.

 starting .
   Warriors from Palestine?

Bast.
                                            No, good my lord!
   The holy legate on his way to Rome;
   Who by late tempests driven on our coasts,
   Means here his shatter'd pinnace to refit,
   And give refreshment to his weary train.

Ul.
   In evil hour he comes to lord it here.

Bast.
   He doth appear a meek and peaceful man.

Ul.
   'Tis seeming all. I would with mailed foes
   Far rather in th' embattled plain contend,
   Than strive with such my peaceful town within.
   Already landed, sayst thou?

Bast.
   Yes, from the beach their grave procession comes.
   Between our gazing sight and the bright deep
   That glows behind them in the western sun,
   Crosses and spears and croziers show aloft
   Their darken'd spikes, in most distinct confusion;
   While grey-cowl'd monks, and purple-stoled priests,
   And crested chiefs, a closing group below,
   Motley and garish, yet right solemn too,
   Move slowly on.—

Ul.
   Then must I haste to meet them.

Bast.
   Or be most strangely wanting in respect.
   For every street and alley of your city
   Its eager swarm pours forth to gaze upon them:
   The very sick and dying, whose wan forms
   No more did think to meet the breath of heaven,
   Creep to their doors, and stretch their wither'd arms
   To catch a benediction. Blushing maids,
   Made bold by inward sense of sanctity,
   Come forth with threaded rosaries in their hands
   To have them by the holy prelate bless'd;
   And mothers hold their wond'ring infants up,
   That touch of passing cowl or sacred robe
   May bring them good. And in fair truth, my lord,
   Among the crowd the rev'rend legate seems
   Like a right noble and right gentle parent,
   Cheering a helpless race.

Ul.
   Ay, 'tis right plain thou art besotted too.
   Were he less gentle I should fear him less.


 Exit.
Bast.
   He's in a blessed mood: what so disturbs him?

Ter.
   What has disturb'd him long, as well thou knowest:
   Aurora's persevering fond belief
   That her beloved Ermingard still lives,
   And will return again. To guide his bark
   Upon our dang'rous coast, she nightly kindles
   Her watch-fire, sitting by the lonely flame;
   For so she promis'd, when he parted from her,
   To watch for his return.

Bast.
   Ulrick in wisdom should have married them
   Before he went, for then the chance had been
   She had not watch'd so long.
   Your widow is a thing of more docility
   Than your lorn maiden.—Pardon, fair Terentia.

Ter.
   Thy tongue wags freely. Yet I must confess,
   Had Ulrick done what thou callst wisely, he
   The very thing had done which as her kinsman
   He was in duty bound to. But, alas!
   A wayward passion warp'd him from the right,
   And made him use his power ungen'rously
   Their union to prevent.

Bast.
   But though the death of Ermingard were prov'd,
   Thinkst thou Aurora would bestow her hand
   On one who has so long her wishes cross'd,
   A lover cloth'd in stern authority?

Ter.
   I know not; Ulrick fondly so believes;
   And I, although allied to him by blood,
   The playmate also of his early days,
   Dare not an opposite opinion utter.

Bast.
   Hark there! I hear without th' approaching crowd.
   My duty on this public ceremony
   I must attend, for honour of the state.


 
   In petty courts like this, on such occasions,
   One spangled doublet more or less bears count.


 Exeunt severally.
SCENE II.
An arbour, supported by rustic wooden pillars, twined round with flowers and green plants, and a flowergarden seen in the background between the pillars. Enter Page, followed by Edda , speaking as she enters.
Edda.
   Yes, do so, boy; Aurora is at hand.—
   But take with thee, beside, this little basket,
   And gather roses in the farther thicket,
   Close to the garden-gate.—

Page

 taking the basket .
   Give it me then. She chid me yesterday
   For gath'ring full-spread roses, whose loose leaves
   Fell on her lap: to-day I'll fill my basket
   With buds, and blossoms, and half open'd flowers,
   Such as nice dames do in their kerchiefs place.

Edda.
   Prate less and move thee quicker. Get thee hence.
   See there, thy mistress comes: haste to thy task.


 Exit page.

Enter Aurora , and Terentia.
Ter.
   Here you will find a more refreshing air;
   The western sun beats fiercely.

Aur.
                                            Western sun!
   Is time so far advanced? I left my couch
   Scarcely an hour ago.

Ter.
                                            You are deceiv'd.
   Three hours have past, but past by you unheeded;
   Who have the while in silent stillness been,
   Like one forlorn, that has no need of time.

Aur.
   In truth I now but little have to do
   With time or any thing besides. It passes;
   Hour follows hour; day follows day; and year,
   If I so long shall last, will follow year:
   Like drops that through the cavern'd hermit's roof
   Some cold spring filters; glancing on his eye
   At measur'd intervals, but moving not
   His fix'd unvaried notice.

Edda.
   Nay, dearest lady, be not so depress'd.
   You have not ask'd me for my song to-day—
   The song you prais'd so much. Shall I not sing it?
   I do but wait your bidding.

Aur.
   I thank thy kindness; sing it if thou wilt.


 Sits down on a low seat, her head supported between both her hands, with her elbows resting on her knees.
SONG.    Where distant billows meet the sky,
   A pale, dull light the seamen spy,
   As spent they stand and tempest-tost,
   Their vessel struck, their rudder lost;
   While distant homes where kinsmen weep,
   And graves full many a fathom deep,
   By turns their fitful, gloomy thoughts pourtray:
   “'Tis some delusion of the sight,
   Some northern streamer's paly light.”
   “Fools!” saith rous'd Hope with gen'rous scorn,
   “It is the blessed peep of morn,
   And aid and safety come when comes the day.”
   And so it is; the gradual shine
   Spreads o'er heaven's verge its lengthen'd line:
   Cloud after cloud begins to glow
   And tint the changeful deep below;
   Now sombre red, now amber bright,
   Till upward breaks the blazing light;
   Like floating fire the gleamy billows burn:
   Far distant on the ruddy tide,
   A black'ning sail is seen to glide;
   Loud bursts their eager joyful cry,
   Their hoisted signal waves on high,
   And life, and strength, and happy thoughts return.
Ter.
   Is not her voice improv'd in power and sweetness?

Edda.
   It is a cheering song.

Aur.
   It cheers those who are cheer'd.

 After a pause.
                                            Twelve years are past;
   Their daughters matrons grown, their infants youths,
   And they themselves with aged furrows mark'd;
   But none of all their kin are yet return'd;
   No, nor shall ever.

Ter.
   Still run thy thoughts upon those hapless women
   Of that small hamlet, whose advent'rous peasants
   To Palestine with noble Baldwin went,
   And ne'er were heard of more?

Aur.
   They perish'd there; and of their dismal fate
   No trace remain'd—none of them all return'd.
   Didst thou not say so?—Husbands, lovers, friends,
   Not one return'd again.

Ter.
                                            So I believe.

Aur.
   Thou but believest then?

Ter.
                                            As I was told—

Edda.
   Thou hast the story wrong.
   Four years gone by, one did return again;
   But marr'd, and maim'd, and chang'd—a woeful man.

Aur.
   And what though every limb were hack'd and maim'd,
   And roughen'd o'er with scars?—he did return.

 Rising lightly from her seat.
   I would a pilgrimage to Iceland go,
   To the antipodes or burning zone,
   To see that man who did return again,
   And her who did receive him.—Did receive him.!
   O what a moving thought lurks here!—How was't?
   Tell it me all: and oh, another time,
   Give me your tale ungarbled.—


 

Enter Viola .
   Ha, Viola! 'tis my first sight of thee
   Since our long vigil. Thou hast had, I hope,
   A sound and kindly sleep.

Viola.
   Kindly enough, but somewhat cross'd with dreams.

Aur.
   How cross'd? what was thy dream? O tell it me!
   I have an ear that craves for every thing
   That hath the smallest sign or omen in it.
   It was not sad?

Viola.
   Nay, rather strange; methought
   A christ'ning feast within your bower was held;
   But when the infant to the font was brought,
   It prov'd a full-grown man in armour clad.

Aur.
   A full-grown man!
 Considering for a moment, and then holding up her hands. 
O blessing on thy dream!
   From death to life restor'd is joyful birth.
   It is, it is! come to my heart, sweet maid,

 Embracing Viola .
   A blessing on thyself and on thy sleep!
   I feel a kindling life within me stir,
   That doth assure me it has shadow'd forth
   A joy that soon shall be.

Ter.
                                            So may it prove!
   But trust not such vain fancies, nor appear
   Too much elated; for unhappy Ulrick
   Swears that your beacon, after this night's watch,
   Shall burn no more.

Aur.
                                            He does! then will we have
   A noble fire. This night our lofty blaze
   Shall through the darkness shoot full many a league
   Its streamy rays, like to a bearded star
   Preceding changeful—ay, and better times.
   It may in very truth. O if his bark
   For many a bark within their widen'd reach
   The dark seas traverse should our light descry!
   Should this be so—it may; perhaps it will.
   O that it might!—We'll have a rousing blaze!
   Give me your hands.

 Taking Viola and Terentia gaily by the hands.
                                            So lightly bounds my heart,
   I could like midnight goblins round the flame
   Unruly orgies hold.—Ha! think ye not,
   When to the font our mail-clad infant comes,
   Ulrick will a right gracious gossip prove?

Viola.
   Assuredly, so will his honour prompt.

Aur.
   Nay, rather say his pride. Methinks I see him;
   His darken'd figure striding 'cross the hall,
   While his high plume, that noddeth to and fro,
   Show'th his perturb'd and restless courtesy.
   Good, noble, happy wight! Yet woe betide
   The luckless hound that fawns on him that day!
   His dismal yell disturbs the ceremony.
   Ha, ha! I needs must laugh.

Ter.
   Indeed you let your fancy wildly run,
   And disappointment will but prove the sharper.

Aur.
   Talk not of disappointment; be assur'd
   Some late intelligence hath Ulrick prompted
   To these stern orders. On our sea there sails,
   Or soon will sail, some vessel, which right gladly
   He would permit to founder on the coast,
   Or miss its course. But no, it will not be:
   In spite of all his hatred, to the shore,
   Through seas as dark as subterraneous night,
   It will arrive in safety.

Ter.
   Nay, sweet Aurora, feed not thus thy wishes
   With wild unlikely thoughts; for Ulrick surely
   No such intelligence hath had, and thou
   But makest thy after-sorrow more acute,
   When these vain fancies fail.

Aur.
   And let them fail: though duller thoughts succeed,
   The bliss e'en of a moment still is bliss.

Viola

 to Ter .
   Thou wouldst not of her dewdrops spoil the thorn,
   Because her glory will not last till noon;
   Nor still the lightsome gambols of the colt,
   Whose neck to-morrow's yoke will gall. Fye on't!
   If this be wise, 'tis cruel.

Aur.
   Thanks, gentle Viola; thou art ever kind.
   We'll think to-morrow still hath good in store,
   And make of this a blessing for to-day,
   Though good Terentia there may chide us for it.

Ter.
   And thus a profitable life you'll lead,
   Which hath no present time, but is made up
   Entirely of to-morrows.

Aur.
   Well, taunt me as thou wilt, I'll worship still
   The blessed morrow, storehouse of all good
   For wretched folks. They who lament to-day,
   May then rejoice: they who in misery bend
   E'en to the earth, be then in honour robed.
   O! who shall reckon what its brighten'd hours
   May of returning joy contain? To-morrow!
   The blest to-morrow! cheering, kind to-morrow!
   I were a heathen not to worship thee.

 To Ter .
   Frown not again; we must not wrangle now.

Ter.
   Thou dost such vain and foolish fancies cherish,
   Thou forcest me to seem unkind and stern.

Aur.
   Ah! be not stern. Edda will sing the song
   That makes feet beat and heads nod to its tune;
   And even grave Terentia will be moved
   To think of pleasant things.

SONG.
   Wish'd-for gales, the light vane veering,
   Better dreams the dull night cheering,
   Lighter heart the morning greeting,
   Things of better omen meeting!
   Eyes each passing stranger watching,
   Ears each feeble rumour catching


 
   Say he existeth still on earthly ground,
   The absent will return, the long, long lost be found.

   In the tower the ward-bell ringing,
   In the court the carols singing,
   Busy hands the gay board dressing,
   Eager steps the threshold pressing,
   Open'd arms in haste advancing,
   Joyful looks through blind tears glancing,
   The gladsome bounding of his aged hound,
   Say he in truth is here, our long, long lost is found.

   Hymned thanks and beadsmen praying,
   With sheath'd sword the urchin playing,
   Blazon'd hall with torches burning,
   Cheerful morn in peace returning,
   Converse sweet that strangely borrows
   Present bliss from former sorrows;
   O who can tell each blessed sight and sound
   That says, he with us bides, our long, long lost is found.
Aur.

 who at first nods her head lightly to the measure, now bursts into tears, taking Edda ' s hands between hers, and pressing them gratefully .
   I thank thee: this shall be our daily song:
   It cheers my heart, although these foolish tears
   Seem to disgrace its sweetness.


Enter Page.
Viola

 to Aur .
   Here comes your page with lightly-bounding steps,
   As if he brought good tidings.

Edda.
                                            Grant he may!

Aur.

 eagerly .
   What brings thee hither, boy?

Page

 to Aur ..
   A noble stranger of the legate's train,
   Come from the Holy Land, doth wait without,
   Near to the garden gate, where I have left him;
   He begs to be admitted to your presence;
   Pleading for such indulgence as the friend
   Of Ermingard, for so he bade me say.

Aur.
   The friend of Ermingard! the Holy Land!

 Pausing for a moment, and then tossing up her arms in ecstasy.
   O God! it is himself!

 Runs eagerly some steps towards the garden, then catching hold of Terentia , who follows her.
   My head is dizzy grown; I cannot go.
   Haste, lead him hither, boy.

 Waving her hand impatiently.
   Fly; hearst thou not?


 Exit page.
Ter.
   Be not so greatly moved. It is not likely
   This should be Ermingard. The boy has seen him,
   And would have known him. 'Tis belike some friend.

Aur.
   No; every thrilling fibre of my frame
   Cries out “it is himself.”

 Looking out.
   He comes not yet: how strange! how dull! how tardy!

Ter.
   Your page hath scarce had time to reach the gate,
   Though he hath run right quickly.

Aur.

 pausing and looking out .
   He comes not yet. Ah! if it be not he;
   My sinking heart misgives me.
   O now he comes! the size and air are his.

Ter.
   Not to my fancy; there is no resemblance.

Aur.
   Nay, but there is: and see, he wears his cloak
   As he was wont to do; and o'er his cap
   The shading plume so hangs.—It is! it is!

Enter Garcio ; and she, breaking from Terentia , runs towards him.
   My lost, my found, my blest! conceal thee not.


 Going to catch him in her arms, when Garcio takes off his plumed cap, and bows profoundly. She utters a faint cry, and shrinks back.
Gar.
   Lady, I see this doffed cap hath discover'd
   A face less welcome than the one you looked for.
   Pardon a stranger's presence; I've presumed
   Thus to intrude, as friend of Ermingard,
   Who bade me—

Aur.
                                            Bade thee! is he then at hand?

Gar.
   Ah, would he were!
   'Twas in a hostile and a distant land
   He did commit to me these precious tokens,
   Desiring me to give them to Aurora,
   And with them too his sad and last farewell.

Aur.
   And he is dead!

Gar.
                                            Nay, wring not thus your hands:
   He was alive and well when he entrusted me
   With what I now return.


 Offering her a small casket.
Aur.
   Alive and well, and sends me back my tokens!

Gar.
   He sent them back to thee as Ulrick's wife;
   For such, forced by intelligence from hence
   Of strong authority, he did believe thee:
   And in that fatal fight, which shortly follow'd,
   He fought for death as shrewdly as for fame.
   Fame he indeed hath earn'd.

Aur.
                                            But not the other?
   Ah, do not say he has! Among the slain
   His body was not found.

Gar.
   As we have learnt, the Knights of blest St. John
   Did from the field of dying and of wounded
   Many convey, who in their house of charity
   All care and solace had; but with the names,
   Recorded as within their walls receiv'd,
   His is not found; therefore we must account him
   With those who, shrouded in an unknown fate,
   Are as the dead lamented, as the dead
   For ever from our worldly care dismiss'd.



 
Aur.
   Lamented he shall be; but from my care
   Dismiss'd as are the dead—that is impossible.

Ter.
   Nay, listen to advice so wise and needful:
   It is the friend of Ermingard who says,
   Let him within thy mind be as the dead.

Aur.
   My heart repels the thought; it cannot be.
   No, till his corse, bereft of life, is found,
   Till this is sworn, and prov'd, and witness'd to me,
   Within my breast he shall be living still.

Ter.
   Wilt thou yet vainly watch night after night,
   To guide his bark who never will return?

Aur.
   Who never will return! And thinkest thou
   To bear me down with such presumptuous words?
   Heaven makes me strong against thee:
   There is a Power above that calms the storm,
   Restrains the mighty, gives the dead to life:
   I will in humble faith my watch still keep;
   Force only shall restrain me.

Gar.
   Force never shall, thou noble, ardent spirit!
   Thy gen'rous confidence would almost tempt me
   To think it will be justified.

Aur.
   Ha! sayst thou so? A blessing rest upon thee
   For these most cheering words! Some guardian power
   Whispers within thee.—No, we'll not despair.


Enter Ulrick .
Ul.

 to Gar .
   Your dismal mission is, I trust, fulfill'd;
   Then, gentle Garcio, deem it not unkind
   That I entreat you to retire; for they
   Who sorrow for the dead, love to be left
   To grieve without constraint.

Aur.
   Thanks for your kind concern, most noble sir;
   And when we needs must sorrow for the dead,
   We'll freely grieve without constraint. But know,
   Until our corse is found, we ring no knell.
   If then your ear for funeral dirges long,
   Go to some other bower; hope still is here.

Ul.
   Ha! still perversely bent? what can convince thee?
   This is distraction.

Aur.
                                            Be it what it may,
   It owns not thy authority. Brave youth

 to Gar .,
   I owe thy gentleness some kind acknowledgment:
   I'll find another time to give thee thanks.


 Exit, followed by Viola and Edda .
Ul.
   Such hope is madness! yield we to her humour?
   No, she must be to sober reason brought,
   By steady, firm control.

Gar.
   Mean you by this, my lord, a fore'd control?

Ul.
   Who shall inquire my meaning?

Gar.
   The holy legate, patron of th' oppress'd,
   Will venture to inquire.

Ul.
   Ay, as his nephew, thou presum'st, I see.
   But know, bold youth, I am unused to threats.

Gar.
   Yet brook them as you may. I take my leave.


 Exit.

Manent Ulrick and Terentia .
Ul.
   Did I not say these cursed meddling priests—
   These men of meekness, wheresoe'er they come,
   Would rule and power usurp? Woe worth the hour
   That brought them here!—and for this headstrong maniac.
   As such, I will—

Ter.
                                            Hush, hush! these precincts quit.
   It is not well, here to expose to view
   Thy weak ungovern'd passions. Thou'rt observ'd;
   Retire with me, where screen'd from ev'ry eye,
   With more possession of thy ruffled mind,
   Thou mayst consider of thy wayward state.


 Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A flat spot of ground on the top of a cliff, with broken craggy rocks on each side, and a large mass of rock in the middle, on which a great fire of wood is burning; a dark sea in the background; the scene to receive no light but from the fire. Two fishermen are discovered watching the fire, and supplying it with wood.
SONG.  st Fisherman.

   “High is the tower, and the watch-dogs bay,
      And the flitting owlets shriek;
   I see thee wave thy mantle grey,
      But I cannot hear thee speak.

   “O, are they from the east or west,
      The tidings he bears to me?
   Or from the land that I love best,
      From the knight of the north countree?”

   Swift down the winding stair she rush'd,
      Like a gust of the summer wind;
   Her steps were light, her breath was hush'd,
      And she dared not look behind.

   She pass'd by stealth the narrow door,
      The postern way also,
   And thought each bush her robe that tore,
      The grasp of a warding foe.

   And she has climb'd the moat so steep,
      With chilly dread and fear,
   While th' evening fly humm'd dull and deep,
      Like a wardman whisp'ring near.

   “Now, who art thou, thou Palmer tall,
      Who beckonest so to me?
   Art thou from that dear and distant hall?
      Art thou from the north countree?”


 

   He rais'd his hood with wary wile,
      That cover'd his raven hair,
   And a manlier face and a sweeter smile
      Ne'er greeted lady fair.

   “My coal-black steed feeds in the brake,
      Of gen'rous blood and true;
   He'll soon the nearest frontier make,
      Let they who list pursue.

   “Thy pale cheek shows an alter'd mind,
      Thine eye the blinding tear;
   Come not with me if aught behind
      Is to thy heart more dear.

   “Thy sire and dame are in that hall,
      Thy friend, thy mother's son;
   Come not with me, if one o'them all,
      E'er lov'd thee as I have done.”

   The lady mounted the coal-black steed,
      Behind her knight I ween,
   And they have pass'd through brake and mead,
      And plain, and woodland green.

   But hark, behind! the warders shout,
      And the hasty larums ring;
   And the mingled sound of a gath'ring rout
      The passing air doth bring.

   O noble steed! now 'quit thee well,
      And prove thy gen'rous kind!
   That fearful sound doth louder swell,
      It is not far behind.

   “The frontier's near—a span the plain,
      Press on and do not fail!
   Ah! on our steps fell horsemen gain,
      I hear their ringing mail.”
 d fish.
   Tush, man! give o'er; thy ballads have no end,
   When thou art in the mood. I hear below
   A sound of many voices on the shore:
   Some boat, belike, forced by the drifting current
   Upon the rocks, may be in jeopardy.

 st fish.
   'Tis all a mock to cut my ditty short.
   Thou hast no mind to hear how it befell
   That those two lovers were by kinsmen stern
   O'erta'en; and how the knight,—by armed foes
   Beset, a bloody combat bravely held,
   And was the while robb'd of his lady fair.
   And how in Paynim land they met again.
   How, as a page disguised, she sought her knight,
   Left on the field as lifeless. How she cheer'd him;
   And how they married were, and home in state—

 d fish.
   Ha' done, ha' done! a hundred times I've heard it.
   My grandam lull'd me with it on her lap
   Full many a night; and as my father sat,
   Mending his nets upon the beach, he sang it.
   I would I knew my prayers as well.—But hark!
   I hear a noise again.—

 Goes to the bottom of the stage, as if he were looking down to the sea.
                                            Along the shore
   I see lights moving swiftly.

 st fish.
   Some fishermen, who, later than the rest,
   Their crazy boat bring in; while, to the beach,
   With flaming brands, their wives and children run.
   Rare sight, indeed, to take thy fancy so!


 Sings again. 

   No fish stir in our heaving net,
   And the sky is dark, and the night is wet;
   And we must ply the lusty oar,
   For the tide is ebbing from the shore;
   And sad are they whose fagots burn,
   So kindly stored for our return.

   Our boat is small and the tempest raves,
   And nought is heard but the lashing waves,
   And the sullen roar of the angry sea,
   And the wild winds piping drearily;
   Yet sea and tempest rise in vain,
   We'll bless our blazing hearths again

   Push bravely, mates! Our guiding star
   Now from its towerlet streameth far.
   And now along the nearing strand,
   See, swiftly moves yon flaming brand:
   Before the midnight watch be past,
   We'll quaff our bowl and mock the blast.

Bast.

 without .
   Holla, good mate! Thou who so bravely singst!
   Come down, I pray thee.

 st fish.
                                            Who art thou who callst?

 d fish.
   I know the voice; 'tis Signor Bastiani.

 st fish.
   What! he, at such an hour, upon the cliff!

 Calling down. 
   I cannot come. If, from my station here,
   This fire untended, I were found; good sooth!
   I had as lief the luckless friar be,
   Who spilt the abbot's wine.

 d fish.
   I'll go to him.


 Exit.
 st fish.

 muttering to himself .
   Ay; leave my watch, indeed! a rare entreaty!


Enter Bastiani .
Bast.
   Wilt thou not go? A boat near to the shore,
   In a most perilous state, calls for assistance:
   Who is like thee, good Stephen, bold and skilful?
   Haste to its aid, if there be pity in thee,
   Or any Christian grace. I will, meantime,
   Thy beacon watch; and should the lady come,
   Excuse thy absence. Haste; make no reply.

 st fish.
   I will; God help us all!


 Exit.
Bast.
   Here is, indeed, a splendid noble fire


 
   Left me in ward. It makes the darkness round,
   To its fierce light oppos'd, seem thick and palpable,
   And closed o'er head, like to the pitchy cope
   Of some vast cavern.—Near at hand, methinks,
   Soft female voices speak: I'll to my station.
 Retires from the front of the stage behind the fire.



Enter Aurora, Terentia and Viola .
Viola.
   A rousing light! Good Stephen hath full well
   Obey'd your earnest bidding.—Fays and witches
   Might round its blaze their midnight revelry
   Right fitly keep.

Ter.
                                            Ay; thou lov'st wilds and darkness,
   And fire and storms, and things unsooth and strange:
   This suits thee well. Methinks, in gazing on it,
   Thy face a witch-like cagerness assumes.

Viola.
   I'll be a goblin then, and round it dance.
   Did not Aurora say we thus should hold
   This nightly vigil. Yea, such were her words.

Aur.
   They were light bubbles of some mantling thought,
   That now is flat and spiritless; and yet,
   If thou art so inclin'd, ask not my leave,
   Dance if thou wilt.

Viola.
                                            Nay, not alone, sweet sooth!
   Witches, themselves, some fiend-like partners find.

Ter.
   And so mayst thou. Look yonder; near the flame
   A crested figure stands. That is not Stephen.

Aur.

 eagerly .
   A crested figure! Where? O call to it!


 Bast . comes forward.
Ter.
   'Tis Bastiani.

Aur.
                                            Ay; 'tis Bastiani:
   'Tis he, or any one; 'tis ever thus;
   So is my fancy mock'd.

Bast.
   If I offend you, madam, 'tis unwillingly
   Stephen has for awhile gone to the beach,
   To help some fishermen, who, as I guess,
   Against the tide would force their boat to land.
   He'll soon return; meantime, I did entreat him
   To let me watch his beacon. Pardon me;
   I had not else intruded; though full oft
   I've clamber'd o'er these cliffs, e'en at this hour,
   To see the ocean from its sabled breast
   The flickering gleam of these bright flames return.

Aur.
   Make no excuse, I pray thee. I am told
   By good Terentia thou dost wish me well,
   Though Ulrick long has been thy friend. I know
   A wanderer on the seas in early youth
   Thou wast, and still canst feel for all storm-toss'd
   On that rude element.

Bast.
   'Tis true, fair lady: I have been, ere now,
   Where such a warning light, sent from the shore,
   Had saved some precious lives; which makes the task,
   I now fulfil, more grateful.

Aur.
   How many leagues from shore may such a light
   By the benighted mariner be seen?

Bast.
   Some six or so, he will descry it faintly,
   Like a small star, or hermit's taper, peering
   From some cav'd rock that brows the dreary waste;
   Or like the lamp of some lone lazar-house,
   Which through the silent night the traveller spies
   Upon his doubtful way.

Viola.
                                            Fie on such images!
   Thou shouldst have liken'd it to things more seemly.
   Thou mightst have said the peasant's evening fire
   That from his upland cot, through winter's gloom,
   What time his wife their evening meal prepares,
   Blinks on the traveller's eye, and cheers his heart;
   Or signal-torch, that from my lady's bower
   Tells wand'ring knights the revels are begun;
   Or blazing brand, that from the vintage-house
   O' long October nights, through the still air
   Looks rousingly.—To have our gallant beacon
   Ta'en for a lazar-house!

Bast.
   Well, maiden, as thou wilt: thy gentle mistress
   Of all these things may choose what likes her best,
   To paint more clearly how her noble fire
   The distant seamen cheer'd, who bless the while
   The hand that kindled it.

Aur.
                                            Shall I be bless'd—
   By wand'ring men returning to their homes?
   By those from shipwreck sav'd, again to cheer
   Their wives, their friends, their kindred? Bless'd by those!
   And shall it not a blessing call from heaven?
   It will; my heart leaps at the very thought:
   The seamen's blessing rests upon my head,
   To charm my wand'rer home.—
                                            Heap on more wood:
   Let it more brightly blaze.—Good Bastiani,
   Hie to thy task, and we'll assist thee gladly.


 As they begin to occupy themselves with the fire, the sound of distant voices, singing in harmony, is heard under the stage as if ascending the cliff.
Aur.
   What may it be?

Viola.
                                            The songs of Paradise,
   But that our savage rocks and gloomy night
   So ill agree with peaceful soothing bliss.

Ter.
   No blessed spirits in these evil days
   Hymn, through the stilly darkness, strains of grace.

Aur.
   Nay, list; it comes again.


 Voices heard nearer.
Ter.
   The mingled sound comes nearer, and betrays
   Voices of mortal men.

Viola.
                                            In such sweet harmony!
   I never heard the like.

Aur.
   They must be good and holy who can utter
   Such heavenly sounds.

Bast.
                                            I've surely heard before


 
   This solemn chorus chaunted by the knights,
   The holy brothers of Jerusalem.
   It is a carol sung by them full oft,
   When saved from peril dire of flood or field.

Aur.
   The Knights of blest St. John from Palestine!
   Alas! why feel I thus? knowing too well
   They cannot bring the tidings I would hear.


 Chorus rises again very near.
Viola.
   List, list! they've gain'd the summit of the cliff:
   They are at hand; their voices are distinct;
   Yea, e'en the words they sing.


 A solemn song or hymn, sung in harmony, heard without.

   Men preserv'd from storm and tide,
   And fire and battle, raging wide;
   What shall subdue our steady faith,
   Or of our heads a hair shall scath?
   Men preserv'd, in gladness weeping,
   Praise Him, who hath alway our souls in holy keeping.

   And wheresoe'er in earth or sea
   Our spot of rest at last shall be;
   Our swords in many a glorious field,
   Surviving heroes still shall wield,
   While we our faithful meed are reaping
   With Him, who hath alway our souls in holy keeping.


Enter six Knights of St. John of Jerusalem in procession, with their followers behind them, who do not advance upon the stage, but remain partly concealed behind the rocks.
Aur.
   Speak to them, Bastiani; thou'rt a soldier;
   Thy mind is more composed.—I pray thee do.


 Motioning Bast . to accost them.
Bast.
   This lady, noble warriors, greets you all,
   And offers you such hospitality
   As this late hour and scanty means afford.
   Will't please ye round this blazing fire to rest?
   After such perilous tossing on the waves,
   You needs must be forspent.

 st knight.
   We thank you, sir, and this most noble dame,
   Whose beacon hath from shipwreck sav'd us. Driven
   By adverse winds too near your rocky coast,
   Warn'd by its friendly light, we stood to sea:
   But soon discov'ring that our crazy bark
   Had sprung a dangerous leak, we took our boat
   And made for shore. The nearest point of land
   Beneath this cliff, with peril imminent,
   By help of some good fishermen we gain'd;
   And here, in God's good mercy, safe we are
   With grateful hearts.

Aur.
                                            We praise that mercy also
   Which hath preserv'd you.

 st knight.
                                            Lady, take our thanks.
   And may the vessel of that friend beloved,
   For whom you watch, as we have now been told,
   Soon to your shore its welcome freight convey!

Aur.
   Thanks for the wish; and may its prayers be heard!
   Renowned men ye are; holy and brave;
   In every field of honour and of arms
   Some of your noble brotherhood are found:
   Perhaps the valiant knights I now behold,
   Did on that luckless day against the Souldan
   With brave De Villeneuve for the cross contend.
   If this be so, you can, perhaps, inform me
   Of one who in the battle fought, whose fate
   Is still unknown.

 st knight.
   None of us all, fair dame, so honour'd were
   As in that field to be, save this young knight.
   Sir Bertram, wherefore, in thy mantle wrapt,
   Standst thou so far behind? Speak to him, lady:
   For in that battle he right nobly fought,
   And may, belike, wot of the friend you mention'd.

Aur. going up eagerly to the young knight . Didst thou there fight? then surely thou didst know
   The noble Ermingard, who from this isle
   With valiant Conrad went:—
   What fate had he upon that dismal day?

Young knight.
   Whate'er his fate in that fell fight might be,
   He now is as the dead.

Aur.
   Is as the dead! ha! then he is not dead:
   He's living still. O tell me—tell me this!
   Say he is still alive; and though he breathe
   In the foul pest-house; though a wretched wand'rer,
   Wounded and maim'd; yea, though his noble form
   With chains and stripes and slavery be disgraced,
   Say he is living still, and I will bless thee.
   Thou knowst—full well thou knowst, but wilt not speak.
   What means that heavy groan? For love of God, speak to me!

 Tears the mantle from his face, with which he had concealed it.
   My Ermingard! My blessed Ermingard!
   Thy very living self restored again!
   Why turn from me?

Er.
                                            Ah! callst thou this restor'd?

Aur.
   Do I not grasp thy real living hand?
   Dear, dear!—so dear! most dear!—my lost, my found!
   Thou turnst and weepst; art thou not so to me?

Er.
   Ah! would I were! alas, alas, I'm lost:
   Sever'd from thee for ever.

Aur.
   How so? What mean such words?

Er.

 shaking his head, and pointing to the cross on his mantle .
   Look on this emblem of a holy vow,


 
   Which binds and weds me to a heavenly love:
   We are, my sweet Aurora, far divided;
   Out bliss is wreck'd for ever.

Aur.
   No; thou art still alive, and that is bliss.
   Few moments since, what would I not have sacrificed,
   To know that in the lapse of many years
   I should again behold thee?—I had been—
   How strongly thou art moved!—Thou heedst me not.

Ter.

 to Aur .
   Were it not better he should leave this spot?
   Let me conduct him to my quiet bower.
   Rest and retirement may compose his mind.

Aur.
   Ay, thou art right, Terentia.

Ter.

 to the other knights .
                                            Noble knights,
   And these your followers! gentle Bastiani
   Will to a place of better comfort lead you,
   Where ye shall find some hospitable cheer,
   And couches for repose.—Have we your leave
   That your companion be a little time
   Ta'en from your company?

 st knight.
                                            You have, good lady,
   Most readily we grant it.—Heaven be with you,
   And this your lovely charge!

 To Bast .
   Sir, to your guidance
   We yield ourselves right gladly.


 Exeunt knights, &c., by a path between the rocks, and Aurora and Ermingard , &c., by another path.
SCENE II.
An ante-room in the house of Aurora . Enter Garcio , beckoning the page, who presently enters by the opposite side.
Gar.
   Come hither, little friend, who didst before
   Serve me so willingly. Wilt thou from me
   Bear to Sir Ermingard a friendly message;
   And say his old companion—

Page.
                                            Nay, I dare not.
   The holy legate and the pope besides
   Might not disturb him now; for dame Terentia
   Hath so decreed. He is in her apartment,
   And yonder is the door.


 Pointing off the stage.
Gar.
                                            From which e'en now
   I saw thee turn?

Page.
                                            I listen'd not for harm.

Gar.
   Do I accuse thee, boy? Is he alone?
   Or is thy lady with him?

Page.
                                            That I know not.
   Do folks groan heaviest when they are alone?

Gar.
   Full oft they do; for then without restraint
   They utter what they feel.

Page.
   Then, by my beard, I think he be alone!
   For as I slipp'd on tiptoe to the door,
   I heard him groan so deeply!

Gar.
                        Thou heardst him groan?

Page.
                                            Ay; deeply.
   I thought when he return'd, we should be merry:
   So starting up at the good tidings, quickly,
   All darkling as I was, I donn'd my clothes:
   But, by my beard! I'd go to bed again,
   Did I not long most curiously to know
   What will betide.

Gar.
   Speak softly, boy; thou, and thy beard to boot,
   Will badly fare if Ulrick should o'erhear thee.
   I know his angry voice: he is at hand.

Page.
   Where shall I go?—He will not tarry here:
   He will but pass to the adjoining hall.
   In this dark nook I'll hide me from his sight,
   Lest he should chide me.


 Retires behind the pillar.
Gar.
   Is there room for me?
   He'll greet me too with little courtesy,
   If I remain to front him.


 Retires behind the pillar also.

Enter Ulrick and Bastiani , speaking as they anter.
Ul.
   And still thou sayst, forbear!

Bast.
                                            Pass on, my lord.

Ul.
   No, by the holy rood! I'll keep in sight
   Of that accursed door which gave him entrance.
   An hour's sand well hath run, which undisturb'd
   They have in converse or endearments spent.
   And yet I must forbear!

Bast.
   They have not told the truth who told you so;
   It is not yet so long.

Ul.
                                            It is! it is!
   I have within these walls, who for my service
   More faithfully have watch'd than Bastiani—
   Ay, or Terentia either.

Bast.
                                            Wrong us not.
   Since Ermingard returns by holy vows
   So bound, that as a rival to your love,
   You may, with honest thoughts of her you love,
   No more consider him; all jealousy
   Within your noble breast should be extinct.
   Then think not to disturb these few short moments
   Of unavailing sorrow; that were cruel.

Ul.
   Thou pitiest others well; I am tormented,
   And no one pities me.—That cursed beacon!
   I said in vain this night should be the last:
   It was a night too much: the sea had now
   Roll'd o'er his lifeless corse; I, been at peace.

Bast.
   For mercy, good my lord! curb such fell thoughts:
   They bear no kindred to your better nature.

Ul.
   My better nature! Mock me not with words;
   Who loves like me, no nature hath but one,
   And that so keen—Would the engulfing waves
   Had fifty fathom deep entombed him!



 
Bast.
   Speak not so loud: pass on; we are within
   The observation of a prying household.
   Pass on, and presently I'll bring you notice
   Of what you would. I pray you, stop not here!


 Exeunt Ul . and Bast ., while Gar . and page come from their concealment .
Page.
   He would have chid me shrewdly.

Gar.
   He is, indeed, an angry, ruthless man,
   And Bastiani no slight task will have
   To keep his wrath from mischief. To the legate
   I'll hie me straight, and ask his better counsel:
   So far thee well, sweet child.

Page.
   Nay, take me with you; I'm afraid to stay.
   I can my prayers and Ave-Maria say,
   The legate will not chide me.

Gar.
   Nay, stay behind; thou art secure, poor elf!
   I'll soon return again.


 Exeunt .
SCENE III.
The apartment of Terentia: Ermingard and Aurora are discovered with Terentia , who is withdrawn to a distance from them . Ermingard is seated with his body thrown back, and his face covered with both his hands, while Aurora stands by him in the attitude of one who is entreating or soothing him .
Erm.
   O cease! Thy words, thy voice, thy hand on mine,
   That touch so dearly felt, do but enhance
   An agony too great.—Untoward fate!
   Thus to have lost thee!

Aur.
   Say not, thou hast lost me.
   Heaven will subdue our minds, and we shall still,
   With what is spared us from our wreck of bliss,
   Be happy.

Erm.
                                            Most unblest, untoward fate!
   After that hapless battle, where in vain
   I courted death, I kept my name conceal'd.
   E'en brave De Villeneuve, master of our Order,
   When he received my vows, did pledge his faith
   Not to declare it. Thus I kept myself
   From all communication with these shores,
   Perversely forwarding my rival's will.
   O blind and credulous fool!

Aur.
   Nay, do not thus upbraid thyself: Heaven will'd it.
   Be not so keenly moved: there still is left
   What to the soul is dear.—We'll still be happy.

Erm.
   The chasten'd pilgrim o'er his lady's grave
   Sweet tears may shed, and may without reproach
   Thoughts of his past love blend with thoughts of heaven.
   He whom the treach'ry of some faithless maid
   Hath robb'd of bliss, may, in the sturdy pride
   Of a wrong'd man, the galling ill endure;
   But sever'd thus from thee, so true, so noble,
   By vows that all the soul's devotion claim,
   It makes me feel—may God forgive the crime!
   A very hatred of all saintly things.
   Fool—rash and credulous fool! to lose thee thus!

Aur.
   Nay, say not so: thou still art mine. Short while,
   I would have given my whole of life besides
   To've seen but once again thy passing form—
   Thy face—thine eyes turn'd on me for a moment;
   Or only to have heard through the still air
   Thy voice distinctly call me, or the sound
   Of thy known steps upon my lonely floor:
   And shall I then, holding thy living hand
   In love and honour, say, thou art not mine?

Erm.

 shaking his head .
   This state—this sacred badge!

Aur.
   O no! that holy cross upon thy breast
   Throws such a charm of valorous sanctity
   O'er thy lov'd form: my thoughts do forward glance
   To deeds of such high fame by thee achieved;
   That e'en methinks the bliss of wedded love
   Less dear, less noble is, than such strong bonds
   As may, without reproach, unite us still.

Erm.
   O creature of a gen'rous constancy!
   Thou but the more distractest me! Fool, fool!

 Starting from his seat, and pacing to and fro distractedly .
   Mean, misbelieving fool!—I thought her false,
   Credulous alone of evil—I have lost,
   And have deserv'd to lose her.

Aur.
   Oh! be not thus! Have I no power to soothe thee?
   See, good Terentia weeps, and fain would try
   To speak thee comfort.

Ter.

 coming forward .
   Ay; bethink thee well,
   Most noble Ermingard, heaven grants thee still
   All that is truly precious of her love,—
   Her true and dear regard.

Erm.
   Then heaven forgive my black ingratitude,
   For I am most unthankful!

Ter.
                                            Nay, consider,
   Her heart is thine: you are in mind united.

Erm.
   United! In the farthest nook o' th' earth
   I may in lonely solitude reflect,
   That in some spot—some happier land she lives,
   And thinks of me. Is this to be united?

Aur.
   I cannot, in a page's surtout clad,
   Thy steps attend as other maids have done
   To other knights.

Erm.
                                            No, by the holy rood!
   Thou canst not, and thou shouldst not. Rather would I,
   Dear as thou art, weep o'er thee in thy grave,
   Than see thee so degraded.

Aur.
                                            Hear me out.
   I cannot so attend thee—noon and eve
   Thy near companion be! but I have heard


 
   That near the sacred houses of your order,
   Convents of maids devout in Holy Land
   Establish'd are—maids who in deeds of charity
   To pilgrims and to all in warfare maim'd,
   In sacred warfare for the holy cross,
   Are deem'd the humble partners of your zeal.

Erm.
   Ay, such there are; but what availeth this?

Aur.
   There will I dwell, a vow'd and humble sister.
   We shall not far be sever'd. The same winds
   That do o' nights through your still cloisters sigh,
   Our quiet cells visiting with mournful harmony,
   Shall lull my pillow too. Our window'd towers
   Shall sometimes show me on the neighbouring plains,
   Amidst thy brave companions, thy mail'd form
   Crested with glory, on thy pawing steed
   Returning from the wars. And when at last
   Thou art in sickness laid—who will forbid
   The dear sad pleasure—like a holy bride
   I'll by thy death-bed stand, and look to heaven
   Where all bless'd union is. O! at the thought,
   Methinks this span of life to nothing shrinks,
   And we are bless'd already. Thou art silent:
   Dost thou despise my words?

Erm.
   O no! speak to me thus: say what thou wilt:
   I am subdued. And yet these bursting tears!
   My heart is rent in twain: I fear—I fear
   I am rebellious still.

 Kneeling, and taking both her hands between his, and kissing them with great devotion .
   School me or chide me now: do what thou wilt:
   I am resign'd and humble.
Ter.

 advancing to them with alarm .
   Hear ye that noise without?—They force the door,
   And angry Ulrick comes.

Erm.

 starting from his knees furiously .
   Thank heaven this hated rival front to front
   Shall now oppose me! God avenge the right!


Enter Ulrick , bursting into the room, followed by Bastiani .
Ul.

 to Erm .
   Vow'd, holy knight; from all vain earthly love
   Pure and divided; in a lady's chamber
   Do we surprise thee? Quit it instantly:
   It is a place for thee unfit: and know,
   In sacred wardship will I keep that maid.

Erm.
   In sacred wardship! O unblushing face!
   What of thy baseness, treachery, and falsehood
   I could declare, my choking voice forbids,
   Which utterance hath not.—Here's a ready tongue—


 Drawing his sword .
   Defend thee, then, and heaven defend the right!


 They both draw, and fight furiously , Bastiani endeavouring in vain to interpose; when the legate and his train, with Garcio and the Knights of St. John, enter, and separate them .
Leg.
   Put up your weapons: to the holy church
   This cause belongs, and to her high award
   I charge you both that you in all humility
   Submit. Lord Ulrick, to the pope perforce
   You must account of this your wardship give,
   Or by yourself in person, or your deputy,
   To Rome forthwith despatch'd.

 Ul . bows sullenly .
   As for the lady, to my guardian care,
   Till we before the holy father come,
   She must commit herself. And thou, Sir Ermingard,
   Shalt to the sovereign pontiff and the patron
   Of thy most valiant order, fully show
   Wherein thou'st been aggriev'd. If the bless'd cross
   Thou hast assum'd, supposing other vows
   That did before engage thee, were annull'd,
   By false reports deceived; the holy Urban,
   Our wise enlighten'd father, will, I trust,
   A dispensation grant, that shall empower thee
   To doff with honour this thy sacred mantle,
   And in its stead a bridegroom's robe assume.


 Ermingard and Aurora both embrace the legate's knees, who raises them up gently .
   It is enough; forbear, forbear, my children;
   I am too richly thank'd.
   And now we must with sober minds confer:
   For when the wind is fair, we sail for Rome.
   Some days, perhaps, it may adversely blow—
   Perhaps some weeks; for I have known it oft
   Hold vessels bound.
Aur.

 tossing up her arms joyfully as she speaks .
   No; it will change to-morrow.

Erm.
   Dear ardent soul! canst thou command the winds?

 Aur . shrinks back ashamed .
Leg.
   Blush not, sweet maid; nor check thy ardent thoughts;
   That gen'rous, buoyant spirit is a power
   Which in the virtuous mind doth all things conquer.
   It bears the hero on to arduous deeds:
   It lifts the saint to heaven.


 Curtain drops .


ETHWALD: A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS. PART FIRST.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Oswal , king of Mercia .

Edward , his nephew, and ethling or heir to the crown .

Seagurth , father to Edward .

Ethwald .

Ethelbert , a noble Thane .

Selred , elder brother to Ethwald .

Mollo , father to Ethwald , a Thane of small consideration .

Hexulf , a bigoted bishop .

Alwy , an artful adventurer .

Woggarwolfe , a rude marauding Thane .

Ongar , a creature of Alwy's .

Mystics and Mystic Sisters, supposed to be successors of the Druidical diviners; soldiers, attendants, & c .

WOMEN Elburga , daughter to king Oswal .

Bertha , attached to Ethwald .

Sigurtha , mother to Bertha , and niece to Mollo , living in his castle, with her daughter, as part of his family .

Dwina , attendant on Elburga .

Ladies, attendants, and female Druids.



The scene is supposed to be in England, in the kingdom of Mercia, and the time near the end of the Heptarchy .
ACT I. SCENE I.
The court of a Saxon castle . Ethwald is discovered lying upon the ground as if half asleep. The sound of a horn is heard without, at which he raises his head a little, and lays it down again. The gate of the castle opens at the bottom of the stage, and enter Selred, Ethelbert , and attendants, as if returned from hunting . Sel . and Eth . walk forward to the front, and the others retire by different sides of the stage .
Selred.
   This morning's sport hath bravely paid our toil.
   Have not my dogs done credit to their breed?

Eth.
   I grant they have.

Sel.
                                            Mark'd you that tawny hound,
   With stretched nostrils snuffing to the ground,
   Who still before, with animating yell,
   Like the brave leader of a warlike band,
   Through many a mazy track his comrades led
   Right in the tainted path?
   I would not for the weregild of a Thane
   That noble creature barter.

Eth.
   I do not mean to tempt thee with the sum.
   Seest thou where Ethwald, like a cottage cur
   On dunghill stretch'd, half sleeping, half awake,
   Doth bask his lazy carcass in the sun?
   Ho! laggard there!

 To Ethw ., who just raises his head, and lays it down again . Eth . going up close to him .
   When slowly from the plains and nether woods,
   With all their winding streams and hamlets brown,
   Updrawn, the morning vapour lifts its veil,
   And through its fleecy folds, with soften'd rays,
   Like a still'd infant smiling in his tears,
   Looks through the early sun:—when from afar
   The gleaming lake betrays its wide expanse,
   And, lightly curling on the dewy air,
   The cottage smoke doth wind its path to heaven:
   When larks sing shrill, and village cocks do crow,
   And lows the heifer loosen'd from her stall:
   When heaven's soft breath plays on the woodman's brow,
   And every hare-bell and wild tangled flower
   Smells sweetly from its cage of checker'd dew:
   Ay, and when huntsmen wind the merry horn,
   And from its covert starts the fearful prey;
   Who, warm'd with youth's blood in his swelling veins,
   Would, like a lifeless clod, outstretched lie,
   Shut up from all the fair creation offers?

 Ethw . yawns and heeds him not .
   He heeds me not.

Sel.
   I will assail him now.

 In a louder voice .
   Ho! heads of foxes deck our huntsman's belt,
   Which have through tangled woods and ferny moors
   With many wiles shaped out their mazy flight,
   Have swum deep floods, and from the rocky brows
   Of frightful precipices boldly leap'd
   Into the gulf below.
   Nay, e'en our lesser game hath nobly done;
   Across his shoulders hang four furred feet,
   That have full twenty miles before us run
   In little space. O, it was glorious!



 
Ethw.

 raising his head carelessly .
   Well well, I know that hares will swiftly run
   When dogs pursue them.


 Stretches himself and goes to rest again .
Eth.
   Leave him to rest, he is not to be rous'd.

Sel.
   Well, be it so. By heaven, my fretted soul
   Did something of this easy stupor lack,
   When near the latter limits of our chace
   I pass'd the frowning tower of Ruthergeld.
   He hangs a helmet o'er his battlements,
   As though he were the chief protecting Thane
   Of all the country round.
   I'll teach th' ennobled Ceorl, within these bounds,
   None may pretend in noble birth to vie
   With Mollo's honour'd line!

Eth.

 proudly .
                                            Hast thou forgot?
   Or didst thou never hear whose blood it is
   That fills these swelling veins?

Sel.
   I cry you mercy, Thane: I little doubt
   Some brave man was the founder of your house.

Eth.
   Yes, such an one, at mention of whose name
   The brave descendants of two hundred years
   Have stately ris'n with more majestic step,
   And proudly smiled.

Sel.
                                            Who was this lordly chieftain?

Eth.
   A Swabian shepherd's son, who, in dark times,
   When ruin dire menaced his native land,
   With all his native lordship in his grasp,
   A simple maple spear and osier shield,
   Making of keen and deep sagacity,
   With daring courage and exalted thoughts,
   A plain and native warrant of command,
   Around him gather'd all the valiant youth;
   And, after many a gallant enterprise,
   Repell'd the foe, and gave his country peace.
   His grateful country bless'd him for the gift,
   And offer'd to his worth the regal crown.

Sel.

 bowing respectfully .
   I yield me to thy claim.


 Ethwald , who has raised himself up by degrees upon hearing the story, and listened eagerly, now starts up, impatient of the pause, and catches Eth . by the arm .
Ethw.
   And did they crown him then?

Eth.
   No; with a mind above all selfish wrong,
   He gen'rously the splendid gift refused:
   And drawing from his distant low retreat
   The only remnant of the royal race,
   Did fix him firmly on his father's seat;
   Proving until his very latest breath
   A true and loyal subject.


 Ethwald's countenance changes, then turning from Eth . he slowly retires to the bottom of the stage and exit . Eth . follows him attentively with his eye as he retires .
Eth.
   Mark'd you the changes of the stripling's eye?
   You do complain that he of late has grown
   A musing sluggard. Selred, mark me well:
   Brooding in secret, grows within his breast
   That which no kindred owns to sloth or ease.
   And is your father fix'd to keep him pent
   Still here at home? Doth the old wizard's prophecy,
   That the destruction of his noble line
   Should from the valour of his youngest son,
   In royal warfare, spring, still haunt his mind?
   This close confinement makes the pining youth
   More eager to be free.

Sel.
   Nay, rather say, the lore he had from thee
   Hath o'er him cast this sullen gloom. Ere this,
   Where was the fiercest courser of our stalls
   That did not shortly under him become
   As gentle as the lamb? What bow so stiff
   But he would urge and strain his youthful strength,
   Till every sinew o'er his body rose,
   Like to the sooty forger's swelling arm,
   Until it bent to him? What flood so deep
   That on its foaming waves he would not throw
   His naked breast, and beat each curling surge,
   Until he gain'd the far opposing shore?
   But since he learnt from thee that letter'd art,
   Which only sacred priests were meant to know,
   See how it is, I pray! His father's house
   Has unto him become a cheerless den.
   His pleasant tales and sprightly playful talk,
   Which still our social meals were wont to cheer,
   Now visit us but like a hasty beam
   Between the showery clouds. Nay, e'en the maid
   My careful father destines for his bride,
   That he may still retain him here at home,
   Fair as she is, receives, when she appears,
   His cold and cheerless smile.
   Surely thy penanced pilgrimage to Rome,
   And the displeasure of our holy saint,
   Might well have taught thee that such sacred art
   Was good for priests alone. Thou'st spoilt the youth.

Eth.
   I've spoilt the youth! What thinkst thou then of me?

Sel.
   I'll not believe that thou at dead of night
   Unto dark spirits sayst unholy rhymes;
   Nor that the torch, on holy altars burnt,
   Sinks into smoth'ring smoke at thy approach;
   Nor that foul fiends about thy castle yell,
   What time the darken'd earth is rock'd with storms;
   Though many do such frightful credence hold,
   And sign themselves when thou dost cross their way.
   I'll not believe—

Eth.
                                            By the bless'd light of heaven !—

Sel.
   I cannot think—

Eth.
                                            Nay, by this well-proved sword!

Sel.
   Patience, good Thane! I meant to speak thy praise.

Eth.
   My praise, sayst thou?

Sel.
                                            Thy praise. I would have said,


 
   “That he who in the field so oft hath fought,
   So bravely fought, and still in the honour'd cause,
   Should hold unhallow'd league with damned sprites,
   I never will believe.” Yet much I grieve
   That thou with bold intrusive forwardness,
   Hast enter'd into that which holy men
   Hold sacred for themselves;
   And that thou hast, with little prudence too,
   Entrapp'd my brother with this wicked lore,
   Although methinks thou didst not mean him harm.

Eth.
   I thank thee, Selred; listen now to me,
   And thou shalt hear a plain and simple tale,
   As true as it is artless.
   These cunning priests full loudly blast my fàme,
   Because that I with diligence and cost,
   Have had myself instructed how to read
   Our sacred Scriptures, which, they would maintain,
   No eye profane may dare to violate.
   If I am wrong, they have themselves to blame;
   It was their hard extortions first impell'd me
   To search that precious book, from which they draw
   Their right, as they pretend, to lord it thus.
   But what thinkst thou, my Selred, read I there?
   Of one sent down from heav'n in sov'reign pomp,
   To give into the hands of leagued priests
   All power to hold th' immortal soul of man
   In everlasting thraldom? O far otherwise!

 Taking Selred 's hand with great earnestness.
   Of one who health restored unto the sick,
   Who made the lame to walk, the blind to see,
   Who fed the hungry, and who rais'd the dead,
   Yet had no place wherein to lay His head.
   Of one from ev'ry spot of tainting sin
   Holy and pure; and yet so lenient,
   That He with soft and unupbraiding love
   Did woo the wand'ring sinner from his ways,
   As doth the elder brother of a house
   The erring stripling guide. Of one, my friend,
   Wiser by far than all the sons of men,
   Yet teaching ignorance in simple speech,
   As thou wouldst take an infant on thy lap
   And lesson him with his own artless tale.
   Of one so mighty
   That He did say unto the raging sea
   “Be thou at peace,” and it obeyed His voice;
   Yet bow'd Himself unto the painful death
   That we might live.—They say that I am proud—
   O! had they like their gentle master been,
   I would, with suppliant knee bent to the ground,
   Have kiss'd their very feet.
   But, had they been like Him, they would have pardon'd me
   Ere yet my bending knee had touch'd the earth.

Sel.
   Forbear, nor tempt me with thy moving words!
   I'm a plain soldier, and unfit to judge
   Of mysteries which but concern the learn'd.

Eth.
   I know thou art, nor do I mean to tempt thee.
   But in thy younger brother I had mark'd
   A searching mind of freer exercise,
   Untrammell'd with the thoughts of other men:
   And like to one, who, in a gloomy night,
   Watching alone amidst a sleeping host,
   Sees suddenly along the darken'd sky
   Some beauteous meteor play, and with his hand
   Wakens a kindred sleeper by his side
   To see the glorious sight, e'en so did I.
   With pains and cost I divers books procured,
   Telling of wars, and arms, and famous men;
   Thinking it would his young attention rouse;
   Would combat best a learner's difficulty,
   And pave the way at length for better things.
   But here his seized soul has wrapp'd itself,
   And from the means is heedless of the end.
   If wrong I've done, I do repent me of it.
   And now, good Selred, as thou'st seen me fight
   Like a brave chief, and still in th' honour'd cause,
   By that good token kindly think of me,
   As of a man who long has suffered wrong
   Rather than one deserving so to suffer.

Sel.
   I do, brave Ethelbert.

Eth.
                                            I thank thee, friend.
   And now we'll go and wash us from this dust:
   We are not fit at goodly boards to sit.
   Is not your feast-hour near?

Sel.
                                            I think it is.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A small apartment in Mollo 's castle. Enter Ethwald very thoughtful, who leans against a pillar for some time without speaking.
Ethw.

 coming forward .
   Is it delusion this?
   Or wears the mind of man within itself
   A conscious feeling of its destination?
   What say these suddenly imposed thoughts,
   Which mark such deepen'd traces on the brain
   Of vivid real persuasion, as do make
   My nerved foot tread firmer on the earth,
   And my dilating form tower on its way?
   That I am born, within these narrow walls,
   The younger brother of a petty chief,
   To live my term in dark obscurity,
   Until some foul disease or bloody gash,
   In low marauding strife, shall lay me low?
   My spirit sickens at the hateful thought,
   Which hangs upon it with such thick oppression,
   As doth the heavy, dense, sulphureous air
   Upon the breath it stifles.

 Pulling up the sleeve of his garment, and baring his right arm from the shoulder.
   A firmer strung, a stronger arm than this
   Own'd ever valiant chief of ancient story?
   And lacks my soul within, what should impel it?
   Ah! but occasion, like th' unveiling moon


 
   Which calls the advent'rer forth, did shine on them!
   I sit i' the shade! no star-beam falls on me!

 Bursts into tears, and throws himself back against the pillar. A pause; he then starts forward full of animation, and tosses his arms high as he speaks.
   No; storms are hush'd within their silent cave,
   And unflesh'd lions slumber in the den,
   But there doth come a time!


Enter Bertha , stealing softly upon him before he is aware.
   What, Bertha, is it thou who stealst upon me?

Ber.
   I heard thee loud:
   Conversest thou with spirits in the air?

Ethw.
   With those whose answ'ring voice thou canst not hear.

Ber.
   Thou hast of late the friend of such become,
   And only them. Thou art indeed so strange,
   Thy very dogs have ceas'd to follow thee,
   For thou no more their fawning court receiv'st,
   Nor callest to them with a master's voice.
   What art thou grown, since thou hast lov'd to pore
   Upon those magic books?

Ethw.
   No matter what! a hermit an' thou wilt.

Ber.
   Nay, rather, by thy high assumed gait
   And lofty mien, which I have mark'd of late,
   Ofttimes thou art, within thy mind's own world,
   Some king or mighty chief.
   If so it be, tell me thine honour's pitch,
   And I will cast my regal mantle on,
   And mate thy dignity.


 Assuming much state.
Ethw.
   Out on thy foolery!

Ber.
                                            Dost thou remember
   How on our throne of turf, with birchen crowns
   And willow branches waving in our hands,
   We shook our careless feet, and caroll'd out,
   And call'd ourselves the king and queen of Kent?

Ethw.
   Yes, children ever in their mimic play
   Such fairy state assume.

Ber.
                                            And bearded men
   Do sometimes gild the dull unchanging face
   Of sombre stilly life with like conceits.
   Come, an' you will we'll go to play again.


 Tripping gaily round him.
Ethw.
   Who sent thee here to gambol round me thus?

Ber.
   Nay, fie upon thee! for thou knowst right well
   It is an errand of my own good will.
   Knowest thou not the wand'ring clown is here,
   Who doth the osier wands and rushes weave
   Into all shapes: who chants gay stories too;
   And who was wont to tell thee, when a boy,
   Of all the bloody wars of furious Penda?
   E'en now he is at work before the gate,
   With heaps of pliant rushes round him strew'd;
   In which birds, dogs, and children roll and nestle,
   Whilst, crouching by his side, with watchful eye
   The playful kitten marks each trembling rush
   As he entwists his many cireling bands.
   Nay, men and matrons, too, around him flock,
   And Ethelbert, low seated on a stone,
   With arms thus cross'd, o'erlooks his curious craft.
   Wilt thou not come?

Ethw.
                                            Away, I care not for it!

Ber.
   Nay, do not shake thy head, for thou must come.
   This magic girdle will compel thy steps.


 Throws a girdle round him playfully, and pulls it till it breaks.
Ethw.

 smiling coldly .
   Thou seest it cannot hold me.


 Bertha's face changes immediately: she bursts into tears, and turns away to conceal it.
Ethw.

 soothing her .
   My gentle Bertha! little foolish maid!
   Why fall those tears? wilt thou not look on me?
   Dost thou not know I am a wayward man,
   Sullen by fits, but meaning no unkindness?

Ber.
   O thou wert wont to make the hall rejoice;
   And cheer the gloomy face of dark December!

Ethw.
   And will, perhaps, again. Cheer up, my love!

 Assuming a cheerful voice. 
   And plies the wandering clown his pleasing craft,
   Whilst dogs and men and children round him flock?
   Come, let us join them too.

 Holding out his hand to her, whilst she smiles through her tears.
   How course those glancing drops adown thy cheeks,
   Like to a whimp'ring child! fie on thee, Bertha!


 Wipes off her tears, and leads her out affectionately. Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A narrow stone gallery or passage.

 Voice without. 
   Haste, lazy comrade, there!


Enter two servants by opposite sides, one of them carrying mats of rushes in his arms.
 st serv.
   Setst thou thy feet thus softly to the ground,—
   As if thou hadst been paid to count thy steps?
   What made thee stay so long?

 d serv.
   Heard you the news?

 st serv.
   The news?

 d serv.
                                            Ay, by the mass! sharp news indeed.
   And mark me well! beforehand I have said it;
   Some of those spears now hanging in the hall
   Will wag i' the field ere long.

 st serv.
   Thou hast a marv'llous gift of prophecy.
   I know it well; but let us hear thy news.

 d serv.
   Marry! the Britons and their restless prince,
   Join'd with West Anglia's king, a goodly host,


 
   Are now in Mercia, threat'ning all with ruin.
   And over and besides, God save us all!
   They are but five leagues off.
   'Tis true. And over and besides again,
   Our king is on his way to give them battle.
   Ay, and moreover all, if the late floods
   Have broken down the bridge, as it is fear'd
   He must perforce pass by our castle walls,
   And then thou shalt behold a goodly show!

 st serv.
   Who brought the tidings?

 d serv.
   A soldier sent on horseback, all express:
   E'en now I heard him tell it to the Thane,
   Who caution'd me to tell it unto none,
   That Ethwald might not hear it.

 st serv.
   And thou in sooth obeyst his caution well.
   Now hear thou this from me; thou art a lout;
   And over and besides a babbling fool;
   Ay, and moreover all, I'll break thy head
   If thou dost tell again, in any wise,
   The smallest tittle of it.

 d serv.
   Marry! I can be secret as thyself!
   I tell not those who blab.

 st serv.
   Yes, yes, thy caution is most scrupulous;
   Thou'lt whisper it in Ethwald's hither ear,
   And bid the further not to know of it.
   Give me those trusses.

 d serv.
   Yes, this is made for my old master's seat,
   And this, so soft, for gentle lady Bertha.

 Giving the mats. 
   And this, and this, and this for Ethelbert.
   But see thou put a sprig of mountain-ash
   Beneath it snugly. Dost thou understand?

 st serv.
   What is thy meaning?

 d serv.
   It hath a power to cross all wicked spells;
   So that a man may sit next stool to th' devil,
   If he can lay but slily such a twig
   Beneath his seat, nor suffer any harm.

 st serv.
   I wish there were some herb of secret power
   To save from daily scath of blund'ring fools:
   I know beneath whose stool it should be press'd.
   Get thee along! the feast smokes in the hall.


 Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
A Saxon hall, with the walls hung round with armour. Mollo, Ethelbert, Selred, Ethwald, Bertha, Sigurtha , and others, are discovered sitting round a table, on which stand goblets and flaggons &c. after a feast.
Eth.
   Nay, gentle Bertha, if thou followest him,
   Shear off those lovely tresses from thy head,
   And with a frowning helmet shade those eyes;
   E'en with thy prowess added to his own,
   Methinks he will not be surcharg'd of means
   To earn his brilliant fortune in the field.

Ber.
   Nay, rather will I fill a little scrip
   With sick-men's drugs and salves for fest'ring wounds,
   And journey by his side a trav'lling leech.

Sel.
   That will, indeed, no unmeet comrade be
   For one whose fortune must be earn'd with blows
   Borne by no substitutes.

Ethw.
                                            Well jested, Thanes!
   But some, ere now, with fortune earn'd by blows
   Borne by no substitutes, have placed their mates
   Above the gorgeous dames of castled lords.
   Cheer up, sweet Bertha!
   For ev'ry drug ta'en from thy little scrip
   I'll pay thee back with—

Eth.
                                            Sticks the word in his throat.

Sel.
   It is too great for utt'rance.

Eth.
   Here's to your growing honour, future chief;
   And here is to the lofty dame who shall be—


 They all drink ironically to Ethw . and Berth .
Mollo.

 seriously .
   Here is a father's wish for thee, my son,

 To Ethw .
   Better than all the glare of fleeting greatness.
   Be thou at home the firm domestic prop
   Of thine old father's house, in this as honour'd
   As he who bears far hence advent'rous arms!
   Nor think thee thus debarr'd from warlike deeds:
   Our neighb'ring chiefs are not too peaceable,
   And much adventure breed in little space.

Ethw.
   What! shall I in their low destructive strife
   Put forth my strength, and earn with valiant deeds
   The fair renown of mighty Woggarwolfe,
   The flower of all those heroes? Hateful ruffian!
   He drinks men's blood and human flesh devours!
   For scarce a heifer on his pasture feeds
   Which hath not cost a gallant warrior's life.
   I cry you mercy, father! you are kind,
   But I do lack the grace to thank you for it.


 Mollo leans on the table and looks sad.
Sigur.

 to Mol .
   Good uncle, you are sad! Our gen'rous Ethwald
   Contemns not his domestic station here,
   Though little willing to enrich your walls
   With spoils of petty war.

Ethw.

 seeing his father sad, and assuming cheerfulness .
   Nay, father, if your heart is set on spoil,
   Let it be Woggarwolfe's that you shall covet,
   And small persuasion may suffice to tempt me.
   To plunder him will be no common gain.
   We feasters love the flesh of well-run game:
   And, faith! the meanest beeves of all his herds
   Have hoof'd it o'er as many weary miles,
   With goading pike-men hollaing at their heels,
   As e'er the bravest antler of the woods.
   His very sheep too all are noble beasts,
   For which contending warriors have fought;


 
   And thrifty dames will find their fleece enrich'd
   With the productions of full many a soil.

Ber.
   How so, my Ethwald?

Ethw.
                                            Countest thou for nought
   Furze from the upland moors, and bearded down
   Torn from the thistles of the sandy plain,
   The sharp-tooth'd bramble of the shaggy woods
   And tufted seeds from the dark marsh? Good sooth;
   She well may triumph in no vulgar skill
   Who spins a coat from it.
   And then his wardrobe, too, of costly gear,
   Which from the wallets of a hundred thieves.
   Has been transferring for a score of years,
   In endless change, it will be noble spoil!

 A trumpet is heard without, and Ethw . starts from his seat.
   Ha! 'tis the trumpet's voice!
   What royal leader this way shapes his route?

 A silent pause.
   Ye answer not. and yet ye seem to know.


Enter Servants in haste.
   Good fellows, what say ye?

 st serv.
   The king! the king! and with five thousand men!

 d serv.
   I saw his banners from the battlements
   Waving between the woods.

 d serv.
                                            And so did I.
   His spearmen onward move in dusky lines,
   Like the brown reeds that skirt the winter pool.

Sel.
   Well, well, there needs not all this wond'ring din:
   He passes on, and we shall do our part.

 st serv.
   The foe is three leagues off.

Sel.
   Hold thy fool's tongue! I want no information.


 Ethwald remains for a while thoughtful, then running eagerly to the end of the hall, climbs up and snatches from the walls a sword and shield, with which he is about to run out.
Mollo

 tottering from his seat .
   O go not forth, my rash impetuous son!
   Say yet a term beneath thy father's root,
   And, were it at the cost of half my lands,
   I'll send thee out accoutred like a Thane.

Ethw.
   No, reverend sire, these be my patrimony!
   I ask of thee no more.

Ber.
   And wilt thou leave us?

Mollo.
                                            Ay, he'll break thy heart,
   And lay me in the dust!


 Trumpet sounds again, and Ethw . turning hastily from them, runs out.
Ber.
   Oh! he is gone for ever!

Eth.
   Patience, sweet Bertha!

Sd.
   The castle gates are shut by my command,
   He cannot now escape. Holla, good friends!


 To those without.

Enter Followers.
   All quickly arm yourselves, and be prepared
   To follow me before the fall of eve.

Eth.
   Send out my scout to climb the farther hill,
   And spy if that my bands are yet in sight.

 Exeunt followers.
   Now let us try to tame this lion's whelp.


Enter Servant in haste.
Sel.
   What tidings, man? Is Ethwald at the gate?

Ser.
   No, good my lord, nor yet within the walls.

Sel.
   What, have they open'd to him?

Ser.
                                            No, my lord,
   Loudly he call'd, but when it was refus'd,
   With glaring eyes, like an enchafed wolf,
   He hied him where the lowest southern wall
   Rises but little o'er the rugged rock;
   There, aided by a half-projecting stone,
   He scal'd its height, and holding o'er his head
   His sword and shield, grasp'd in his better hand,
   Swam the full moat.

Eth.

 to Sel .
   O, noble youth!
   Did I not say, you might as well arrest
   The fire of heav'n within its pitchy cloud
   As keep him here?

 Bertha faints away.
   Alas, poor maid!


 Whilst Sigurtha and Eth . &c. attend to Bertha , enter followers and retainers, and begin to take down the armour from the walls.

Enter Woggarwolfe.
Wog.

 to Sel .
   They would have shut your gate upon me now,
   But I, commission'd on the king's affairs,
   Commanded entrance. Oswal greets you, chiefs,
   And gives you orders, with your followers,
   To join him speedily.

 Seeing Bertha .
   What, swooning women here?

Sel.
   Ethwald is gone in spite of all our care,
   And she, thou knowst, my father's niece's child,
   Brought up with him from early infancy.
   Is therein much affected.

Wog.

 smiling .
   O, it is ever thus, I know it well,
   When striplings are concern'd! Once on a time.
   A youthful chief I seiz'd in his own hall,
   When, on the instant, was the floor around
   With fainting maids and shrieking matrons strew'd,
   As though the end of all things had been link'd
   Unto my fatal grasp.

Sel.

 eagerly .
                                            Thou didst not slay him?

Wog.

 smiling contemptuously .
   Asks Selred if I slew mine enemy?

Sel.
   Then, by heav'n's light, it was a ruffian's deed!

Wog.
   I cry thee grace! wearst thou a virgin sword?
   Maidens turn pale when they do look on blood,


 
   And men there be who sicken at the sight,
   If men they may be call'd.

Sel.
                                            Ay, men there be,
   Who sicken at the sight of crimson butchery,
   Yet in the battle's heat will far out-dare
   A thousand shedders of unkindled blood.

Eth.

 coming forward .
   Peace, Thanes! this is no time for angry words.


 Bertha giving a deep sigh , Eth . and Sel . go to her and leave Wog ., who heeds her not, but looks at the men taking the arms from the walls.—Observing one who hesitates between the swords.
Wog.
   Fool, choose the other blade!
   That weight of steel will noble gashes make!
   Nay, rightly guided in a hand like thine,
   Might cleave a man down to the nether ribs.

Sig.

 to Bertha , as she is recovering .
   My gentle child, how art thou?

Ber.
   And no kind hand to hold him!

Eth.
   Be not cast down, sweet maid; he'll soon return;
   All are not lost who join in chanceful war.

Ber.
   I know right well, good Thane, all are not lost.
   The native children of rude jarring war,
   Full oft returning from the field, become
   Beneath their shading helmets aged men:
   But, ah! the kind, the playful, and the gay;
   They who have gladden'd their domestic board,
   And cheer'd the winter-fire, do they return?
    Shaking her head sorrowfully.

   I grieve you all: I will no more complain.
   Dear mother, lead me hence.
 To Sig .

 To Sel .

   I thank you, gentle Selred, this suffices.


 Exit Bertha , supported by Sigurtha .
Sel.

 to Mollo , who has sat for some time with his face covered .
   What, so o'ercome, my father?

Moll.
   I am o'ercome, my son! lend me thine arm.


 Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A forest: the view of an abbey with its spires in the background. Enter the King, attended by Seagurth and several Thanes and followers, some of them wounded, and their wounds bound up, as after a battle. A flourish of trumpets: the King stretches out his arm in the action of command; the trumpets cease, and they all halt.
King.
   Companions of this rough and bloody day,
   Beneath the kindly shelter of this wood
   Awhile repose, until our eager youth
   Shall, from the widely spread pursuit return'd,
   Rejoin our standards.
   Brave seneschal, thou'rt weak with loss of blood;
   Forbear attendance. Ay, and thou, good Baldrick;
   And thou
 to another ,
and all of you.

Sen.
                                            No, gracious king;
   The sight of you, unhurt, doth make the blood
   That in our veins is left so kindly glow,
   We cannot faint.

King.
   Thanks, noble chiefs! dear is the gain I earn,
   Purchas'd with blood so precious. Who are those
   Who hitherward in long procession move?

Sen.
   It is the pious brethren, as I guess,
   Come forth to meet you from yon neighb'ring abbey,
   And at their head the holy Hexulf comes.


Enter Hexulf and monks.
Hex.
   Accept our humble greetings, royal sire!
   Victorious be your arms! and in the dust
   Low be your foes, as in this glorious day!
   Favour'd of heav'n, and of St. Alban, hail!

King.
   I thank your kindly zeal, my rev'rend father;
   And from these holy brethren do accept
   With thanks this token of good will, not doubting
   That much I am beholden to your prayers.

Hex.
   In truth, most gracious king, your armed host
   Has not more surely in your cause prevail'd
   Than hath our joint petition, offered up
   With holy fervour, most importunate.
   Soon as the heav'n-rais'd voices sweetly reach'd
   The echoing arches of yon sacred roofs,
   Saint Alban heard, and to your favour'd side
   Courage and strength, the soul of battle, sent;
   Fear and distraction to th' opposing foe.

King.
   Ah, then, good father, and ye pious monks,
   Would that ye had begun your prayers the sooner!
   For long in doubtful scales the battle hung;
   And of the men who, with this morning's sun,
   Buckled their harness on to follow me,
   Full many a valiant warrior, on his back
   Lies stiff'ning to the wind.

Hex.
   The wicked sprite in ev'ry armed host
   Will find his friends; who doubtless for a time
   May counterpoise the prayers of holy men.
   There are among your troops, I question not,
   Many who do our sacred rites contemn:
   Many who have blasphem'd—Ay, good my lord;
   And many holding baleful heresies.
   Fought Ethelbert, of Sexford, in your host?

King.
   He did, my rev'rend father, bravely fought:
   To him and valiant Selred, Mollo's son,
   Belong the second honours of the day.


 Hexulf looks abashed and is silent.

Enter Edward attended, who, after making his obeisance to the King, runs up eagerly to Seagurth .
Edw.
   You are not wounded, father?

Sea.
   No, my boy.

Edw.
   Thanks to preserving goodness! Noble Thanes,


 
   It grieves me much to see those swathed limbs.
   War wears a horrid, yet alluring face.

 To King. 
   Your friends, my lord, have done me great despite.
   Had they not long detain'd me on the way,
   I should have been with you before the battle.

King.
   Complain not, youth; they had, in this, commands
   Too high to be disputed. And 'tis well,
   For we have had a rough and bloody day.

Edw.
   Ha! is it so? But you have been victorious.
   How went the field?

Sea.
   Loud rose our battle's sound, and for a while
   The Mercians bravely fought; when all at once,
   From some unlook'd-for cause, as yet unknown,
   A powerful panic seiz'd our better wing,
   Which, back recoiling, turn'd and basely fled.
   Touch'd quickly with a seeming sympathy,
   Our centre-force began, in relax'd strength,
   To yield contended space.—So stood the field;
   When on a sudden, like those warrior spirits,
   Whose scatter'd locks the streamy light'ning is,
   Whose spear the bolt of heaven; such as the seer
   In 'tranced gaze beholds midst hurtling storms;
   Rush'd forth a youth unknown, and in a pass,
   Narrow and steep, took his determin'd stand.
   His beck'ning hand and loud commanding voice
   Constrain'd our flying soldiers from behind,
   And the sharp point of his opposing spear
   Met the pale rout before.
   The dark returning battle thicken'd round him.
   His mighty arm deeds of amazement wrought;
   Rapid, resistless, terrible.
   High rose each warlike bosom at the sight,
   And Mercia, like a broad increasing wave,
   Up swell'd into a hugely billow'd height,
   O'erwhelming in its might all lesser things,
   Upon the foe return'd. Selred and Ethelbert
   Fell on their weaken'd flank. Confusion, then,
   And rout and horrid slaughter fill'd the field:
   Wide spread the keen pursuit; the day is ours;
   Yet many a noble Mercian strews the plain.

Edw.

 eagerly .
   But the young hero fell not?

Sea.
   No, my son.

Edw.
   Then bless'd be heaven! there beats no noble heart
   Which shall not henceforth love him as a brother.
   Would he were come unhurt from the pursuit!
   O that I had beheld him in his might,
   When the dark battle turn'd!

Sea.
   Your wish is soon fulfill'd, my eager boy;
   For here, in truth, the youthful warrior comes,
   And, captive by his side, the British Prince.


Enter Ethwald with the British Prince prisoner, accompanied by Selred and Ethelbert , and presents his prisoner to the King.
King

 to Prince .
   Prince of the Britons, clear thy cloudy brow;
   The varied fate of war the bravest prove.
   And though I might complain that thy aggressions
   Have burnt my towns, and filled my land with blood,
   Thy state forbids it. Here, good seneschal,
   Receive your charge, and let him know no change
   Unsuited to a prince.

 To Ethwald .
   And thou, brave warrior, whose youthful arm
   Has brought unto thy king so high a gift,
   Say what proud man may lift his honour'd head,
   And boast he is thy father.

Ethw.
   A Thane, my lord, forgotten and retired;
   I am the youngest son of aged Mollo,
   And Ethwald is my name.

King.
   Youngest in years, though not in honour, youth,
   E'en though the valiant Selred is thy brother.

 Turning to Selred .
   And now be thou the first and noble root,
   From which a noble race shall take its growth,
   Wearing thy honours proudly!
   Of Mairnieth's earldom be henceforth the lord!
   For well I know the council of the states
   Will not refuse to ratify my grant.
   And thou, brave Ethelbert, and Selred, too,
   Ye well have earn'd a noble recompense,
   And shall not be forgot. Come hither, Edward;
   Take thou this hero's hand; and, noble Ethwald,
   Thus let the kingdom's ethling join with me
   In honouring thy worth.

Edw.

 who has gazed at some distance upon Ethwald , springing forward eagerly .
   Give him my hand, my lord! have you not said
   That I should fold him to my burning heart?

 Embraces Ethw .
   Most valiant Ethwald,
   Fain would I speak the thoughts I bear to thee,
   But they do choke and flutter in my throat,
   And make me like a child.


 Passing his hand across his eyes. 
Ethw.

 kissing Edward 's hand .
   I am repaid beyond a kingdom's worth.

Edw.

 to Sea . bounding joyfully .
   Father, have you embraced him?
   Ethwald, my father is a valiant man.


 Sea . embraces Ethw ., but not so eagerly as Edw .
King.

 to Ethw. 
   Brave youth, with you, and with your noble friends,
   I shall, ere long, have further conference.


 Retires to the bottom of the stage with Hexulf .

 Edward , after gazing with admiration upon Ethw. , puts his hand upon his head, as if to measure his height; then upon both his shoulders, as if he were considering the breadth of his chest; then steps some paces back and gazes at him again.
Edw.
   How tall and strong thou art! broad is thy chest:
   Stretch forth, I pray, that arm of mighty deeds.

Ethw . smiles and stretches out his arm ; Edw . looks at it, and then at his own.


 
   Would I were nerv'd like thee!

 Taking Ethw . 's sword. 
   It is of weight to suit no vulgar arm.

 Returning it. 
   There, hero; graceful is the sword of war
   In its bold master's grasp.

Ethw.
   Nay, good my lord, if you will honour me,
   It does become too well your noble hand
   To be return'd to mine.

Edw.
   Ha! sayst thou so? Yes, I will keep thy pledge.
   Perhaps my arm—Ah, no! it will not be!
   But what returning token can I give?
   I have bright spears and shields and shining blades
   But nought ennobled by the owner's use.


 Takes a bracelet from his arm and fastens it round Ethwald ' s.
King

 advancing from the bottom of the stage .
   My worthy chiefs and Thanes, the night wears on,
   The rev'rend bishop, and these pious men,
   Beneath their fane give hospitality,
   And woo us to accept it for the night.

Sea.
   I thought, my lord, you meant to pass the night
   With your brave soldiers in the open field:
   Already they have learnt the pleasing tale.
   Shall I unsay it?

King.
                                            Nay, that were unfit.
   I pray you pardon me, my rev'rend father!
   I cannot house with you; it were unfit.

Hex.
   Should not your greatness spend the night with those
   To whom, in truth, you owe the victory?
   We chant at midnight to St. Alban's praise:
   Surely my lord regards those sacred things.


 Whispers the King.
King.
   Brave Seagurth, there are reasons of good weight
   Why I should lay aside my first intent.
   Let all these wounded chieftains follow me!
   The rest who list may keep the open field.

 To Edw .
   Nephew, thou must not prove a soldier's hardships,
   Ere thou hast earn'd a soldier's name. Nay, nay,
   It must be so.


 Exeunt King, wounded chiefs , Hexulf , and monks, followed by Edward very unwillingly.
Sea.
   Who loves a soldier's pillow, follow me.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
The outside of Mollo 's castle. Bertha, Sigurtha , and others discovered on the walls, and several servants and retainers standing by the gate below.
Berth.
   O, will they ne'er appear? I'll look no more;
   Mine eager gazing but retards their coming.

 Retires, and immediately returns again.
   Holla, good Murdoch!

 To a servant below. 
   Thou putst thy hand above thy sunned eyes.
   Dost thou descry them?

 st serv.
                                            Mercy, gentle lady,
   If you descry them not from that high perch,
   How should I from my level station here?

Sig.

 to Berth .
   Go in, my child, thou art worn out with watching.


 Berth . retires, and  d servant goes at some distance from the walls and looks out another way.
 d serv.
   Here comes the noble Selred.

 All call out. 
                                            Noble Selred!

Berth.

 returning upon the wall .
   What, Ethwald, say ye?

Sig.
   No, it is Selred.


Enter Selred , with followers, and looks up to the walls, where Sigurtha waves her hand.
Sig.
   Welcome, brave Selred! welcome all thy band!
   How far are they behind for whom we watch?

Sel.
   Two little miles or less. Methinks ere this
   Their van should be in sight. My messenger
   Inform'd you?

Sig.
                        Oh, he did!

Sel.
                                            Where is my father?

Sig.
   He rests within, spent with a fearful joy,
   And silent tears steal down his furrow'd cheeks.

Sel.
   I must confer with him. The king intends
   To stop and do him honour on his march,
   But enters not our walls.


 Exeunt into the castle.
SCENE III.
A chamber in the castle. Enter Sigurtha and Bertha , speaking as they enter.
Berth.
   Nay, mother, say not so: was he not wont,
   If but returning from the daily chase,
   To send an upward glance unto that tower?
   There well he knew, or late or cold the hour,
   His eye should find me.

Sig.
   My gentle Bertha, be not thus disturb'd.
   Such busy scenes, such new unlook'd-for things
   Ruffle the flowing stream of habit; men
   Will then forgetful seem, though not unkind.

Berth.
   Thinkst thou?

 shaking her head. 
   I saw him by his sovereign stand,
   And O, how graceful! every eye to him
   Was turn'd, and every face smil'd honours on him!
   Yet his proud station quickly did he leave
   To greet his humbler friends who stood aloof.
   The meanest follower of these walls, already,
   Some mark of kind acknowledgment hath had—
   He look'd not up—I am alone forgotten!

Sig.
   Be patient, child: he will not long delay
   To seek thee in thy modest privacy;
   Approving more to see thee here retired,
   Than, boldly to the army's eye exposed,


 
   Greeting his first approach. I, the mean while,
   Intrusted am with orders from the Thane.
   Which must not be neglected.


 Exit.
Berth.

 after walking up and down, agitated, and frequently stopping to listen .
   Ah, no! deceiv'd again! I need not listen!
   No bounding steps approach.


 She sits down despondingly. Enter Ethwald behind, and steals softly up to her.
Ethw.
   Bertha!

Berth.

 starting up .
   My Ethwald!


 He holds out his arms to her joyfully, and she bursts into tears.
Ethw.
   Thou dost not grieve that I am safe return'd?

Berth.
   O no! I do not grieve, yet I must weep.
   Hast thou in truth been kind? I will not chide:
   I cannot do it now.

Ethw.
   O, fie upon thee! like a wayward child:
   To look upon me thus! cheer up, my love.


 He smiles upon her joyfully, and her countenance brightens. She then puts her hand upon his arm, and, stepping back a little space, surveys him with delight.
Berth.
   Thou man of mighty deeds!
   Thou, whom the brave shall love and princes honour!
   Dost thou, in truth, return to me again,
   Mine own, my very Ethwald?

Ethw.
   No, that were paltry; I return to thee
   A thousandfold the lover thou hast known me.
   I have of late been careless of thee, Bertha.
   The hopeless calm of dull obscurity,
   Like the thick vapours of a stagnant pool,
   Oppress'd my heart and smother'd kind affections;
   But now th' enlivening breeze of fortune wakes
   My torpid soul—When did I ever fold thee
   To such a warm and bounding heart as this?

 Embraces her.
   The king has given to me Mairnieth's earldom—
   Nay, smile, my Bertha!

Berth.
   So I do, my Ethwald.

Ethw.
   The noble ethling greatly honours me
   With precious tokens; nay, the very soldiers
   Do rear their pointed weapons as I pass;
   As though it were to say, “there goes the man
   That we would cheerly follow.”
   Unto what end these fair beginnings point
   I know not—but of this I am assured,
   There is a course of honour lies before me,
   Be it with dangers, toil, or pain beset,
   Which I will boldly tread. Smiles not my love?

Berth.
   I should, in truth; but how is this? methinks
   Thou ever lookst upon the things to come,
   I on the past. A great and honour'd man
   I know thou'lt be: but O, bethink thee, then,
   How once thou wert, within these happy walls,
   A little cheerful boy, with curly pate,
   Who led the infant Bertha by the hand,
   Storing her lap with ev'ry gaudy flower;
   With speckled eggs stolen from the hedgeling's nest,
   And berries from the tree; ay, think on this,
   And then I know thou'lt love me!

 Trumpet sounds. Catching hold of him eagerly.
   Hearst thou that sound? The blessed saints preserve thee!
   Must thou depart so soon?

Ethw.
                                            Yes, of necessity: reasons of weight
   Constrain the king, and I, new in his service,
   Must seem to follow him with willing steps.
   But go thou with me to the castle gate.
   We will not part until the latest moment.

Berth.
   Yet stop, I pray, thou must receive my pledge.
   Seest thou this woven band of many dyes,
   Like to a mottled snake? its shiny woof
   Was whiten'd in the pearly dew of eve,
   Beneath the silver moon; its varied warp
   Was dyed with potent herbs, at midnight cull'd.
   It hath a wond'rous charm: the breast that wears it
   No change of soft affection ever knows.

Eth.

 receiving it with a smile .
   I'll wear it, Bertha.

 Trumpet sounds.
   Hark! it calls me hence.

Berth.
   O go not yet! here is another gift,
   This ring, enrich'd with stone of basilisk,
   Whenever press'd by the kind wearer's hand,
   Presents the giver's image to his mind.
   Wilt thou not wear it?

Ethw.

 receiving it .
   Yes, and press it too.

Berth.
   And in this purse—


 Taking out a purse
Ethw.
   What! still another charm?

 Laughing.
                                            Thou simple maid!
   Dost thou believe that witched gear like this
   Hath power a lover faithful to retain,
   More than thy gentle self?

Berth.
   Nay, laugh, but wear them.

Ethw.
   I will, my love, since thou wilt have it so.

 Putting them in his breast. 
   Here are they lodged, and cursed be the hand
   That plucks them forth! And now receive my pledge.
   It is a jewel of no vulgar worth:

 Ties it on her arm. 
   Wear it and think of me. But yet, belike,
   It must be steeped in some wizard's pot,
   Or have some mystic rhyming mutter'd o'er it,
   Ere it will serve the turn.

Berth.

 pressing the jewel on her arm .
   O no! right well I feel there is no need.

Ethw.
   Come, let us go: we do not part, thou knowst,
   But at the castle gate. Cheer up, my Bertha!
   I'll soon return, and oft return again.


 Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
An apartment in a royal castle. Enter Ethwald and Alwy , speaking as they enter.
Ethw.
   What, peace! peace, sayst thou, with these glorious arms,


 
   In conquest red, occasion bright'ning round us,
   And smiling victory, with beck'ning hand,
   Pointing to future fields of nobler strife,
   With richer honours crown'd? What, on the face
   Of such fair prospects draw the veil of peace!
   Cold blasting peace! The blackest fiend of hell
   Hath not a thought more dev'lish!

Alwy.
   It is indeed a flat unpleasant tale
   For a young warrior's ear: but well hast thou
   Improv'd the little term of bold occasion;
   Short while thou wert but Mollo's younger son,
   Now art thou Mairnieth's lord.

Ethw.
   And what is Mairnieth's lordship! I will own
   That, to my distant view, such state appear'd
   A point of fair and noble eminence;
   But now—what is it now? O! it is sunk
   Into a petty knoll! I am as one
   Who doth attempt some lofty mountain's height,
   And having gain'd what to the upcast eye
   The summit's point appear'd, astonish'd sees
   Its cloudy top, majestic and enlarged,
   Towering aloft, as distant as before.

Alwy.
   Patience, brave Ethwald; ere thy locks be grey,
   Thy helmed head shall yet in battle tower,
   And fair occasion shape thee fair reward.

Ethw.
   Ere that my locks be grey! the world ere now
   Hath crouch'd beneath a beardless youth. But I—
   I am as one who mounts to th' azure sky
   On the rude billow's back, soon sunk again:
   Like the loud thunder of th' upbreaking cloud,
   The terror of a moment. Fate perverse!
   'Till now, war's frowning spirit, rous'd, was wont
   To urge with whirling lash his sable steeds,
   Nor slack his furious speed till the wide land
   From bound to bound beneath his axle shook.
   But soon as in my hand the virgin spear
   Had flesh'd its ruddy point, then is he turn'd
   Like a tired braggart to his caves of sloth.

 Stamping on the ground. 
   Peace! cursed peace! Who will again unchain
   The grizly dog of war?

Alwy.
   Meanst thou the British prince?

Ethw.

 eagerly .
   What sayst thou, Alwy?

Alwy.
   I said not aught.

Ethw.
   Nay, marry! but thou didst!
   And it has rais'd a thought within my mind.
   The British prince releas'd, would he not prove
   A dog of war, whose yell would soon be follow'd?

Alwy.
   They do indeed full hard advantage take
   Of his captivity, and put upon him
   Conditions suited to his hapless state,
   More than his princely will.

Ethw.
   'Tis basely done: would that some friendly hand
   His prison would unbar and free the thrall!
   But no, no, no! I to the king resign'd him;
   'Twere an unworthy deed.

Alwy.
                                            It were most difficult;
   For now they keep him in a closer hold,
   And bind his hands with iron.

Ethw.
   Have they done this? I'm glad on't! O I'm glad on't!
   They promised nought unworthy of a prince
   To put upon him—Now my hands are free!
   And, were it made of living adamant,
   I will unbar his door. Difficult, sayst thou?
   No, this hath made it easy.

Alwy.
   Well softly then; we may devise a way
   By which the seneschal himself will seem
   The secret culprit in this act.

Ethw.
                                            No, no!
   I like it not; though I must work i' the dark,
   I'll not in cunningly devised light
   Put on my neighbour's cloak to cause his ruin.
   But let's to work apace! the storm shall rise!
   My sound shall yet be heard!

Alwy.
   Fear not, thou shalt ere long be heard again,
   A dark'ning storm which shall not soon be lay'd.

Ethw.
   Ah, thou hast touch'd where my life's life is cell'd!
   Is there a voice of prophecy within thee?

 Catching hold of his arm eagerly.
   I will believe there is! my stirring soul
   Leapt at thy words. Such things ere now have been:
   Men oft have spok'n, unweeting, of themselves;
   Yea, the wild winds of night have utter'd words,
   That have unto the list'ning ear of hope
   Of future greatness told, ere yet the thoughts
   On any certain point had fix'd their hold.

Alwy.
   Thou mayst believe it: I myself, methinks,
   Feel secret earnest of thy future fortune;
   And please myself to think my friendly hand
   May humbly serve, perhaps, to build thy greatness.

Ethw.
   Come to my heart, my friend! though new in friendship,
   Thou, and thou only, bearst true sympathy
   With my aspiring soul. I can with thee
   Unbar my mind—Methinks thou shiv'rest, Alwy.

Alwy.
   'Tis very cold.

Ethw.
   Is it? I feel it not:
   But in my chamber burns the crackling oak,
   There let us go.

Alwy.
   If you are so inclin'd.


 As they are going , Ethw . stops short, and catches hold of Alwy eagerly.
Ethw.
   A sudden fancy strikes me: Woggarwolfe,
   That restless ruffian, might with little art
   Be rous'd on Wessex to commit aggression:
   Its royal chief, now leaguing with our king,
   Will take the field again.

Alwy.
   We might attempt him instantly: but move,
   In faith I'm cold!


 Exeunt.


 
SCENE V.
A dark apartment in the same castle. Woggarwolfe is discovered asleep upon a couch of rushes, and covered with a mat. Enter Alwy and a follower, with a lad bearing a torch before them. Alwy signs with his hand, and the torch-bearer retires to a distance.
Alwy.
   Softly, ere we proceed; a sudden thought,
   Now crossing o'er my mind, disturbs me much.
   He who to-night commands the farther watch,
   Canst thou depend upon him?

Fol.
   Most perfectly; and, free of hostile bounds,
   The British prince ere this pursues his way.

Alwy.
   I'm satisfied: now to our present purpose.

 As they advance towards the couch , Woggarwolfe is heard speaking in his sleep.
   Ha! speaks he in his sleep? some dream disturbs him:
   His quiv'ring limbs beneath the cov'ring move.
   He speaks again.

Wog.

 in his sleep .
   Swift, in your package stow those dead men's gear,
   And loose their noble coursers from the stall.

Alwy.
   Ay, plund'ring in his sleep.

Wog.
   Wipe thou that blade:
   Those bloody throats have drench'd it to the hilt.

Alwy.
   O, hear the night-thoughts of that bloody hound!
   I must awake him. Ho, brave Woggarwolfe!

Wog.
   Hear how those women scream! we'll still them shortly.

Alwy.
   Ho, Woggarwolfe!

Wog.
   Who calls me now? cannot you master it?

 Alwy knocks upon the ground with his stick.
   What, batt'ring on it still? Will it not yield?
   Then fire the gate.

Alwy

 shaking him .
   Ho, Woggarwolfe, I say!

Wog.

 starting up half awake .
   Is not the castle taken?

Alwy.
   Yes, it is taken.

Wog.

 rubbing his eyes .
   Pooh! it is but a dream.

Alwy.
   But dreams full oft are found of real events
   The forms and shadows.
   There is in very deed a castle taken,
   In which your Wessex foes have left behind
   Nor stuff, nor store, nor make of living thing.
   Bind on thy sword and call thy men to arms!
   Thy boiling blood will bubble in thy veins,
   When thou hast heard it is the tower of Boruth.

Wog.
   My place of strength?

Fol.
   Yes, chief; I spoke with one new from the West,
   Who saw the ruinous broil.

Wog.
   By the black fiends of hell! therein is stored
   The chiefest of my wealth. Upon its walls
   The armour of a hundred fallen chiefs
   Did rattle to the wind.

Alwy.
                                            Now will it sound elsewhere.

Wog.

 in despair .
   My noble steeds, and all my stalled kine!
   O, the fell hounds! no mark of living thing?

Fol.
   No mark of living thing.

Wog.
   Ah! and my little arrow-bearing boy!
   He whom I spared amidst a slaughter'd heap,
   Smiling all weetless of th' uplifted stroke
   Hung o'er his harmless head!
   Like a tamed cub I rear'd him at my feet:
   He could tell biting jests, bold ditties sing,
   And quaff his foaming bumper at the board,
   With all the the mock'ry of a little man.
   By heav'n I'll leave alive within their walls
   Nor maid, nor youth, nor infant at the breast,
   If they have slain that child! blood-thirsty ruffians!

Alwy.
   Ay, vengeance! vengeance! rouse thee like a man!
   Occasion tempts; the foe, not yet return'd,
   Have left their castle careless of defence.
   Call all thy followers secretly to arms:
   Set out upon the instant.

Wog.
   By holy saints, I will! reach me, I pray!


 Pointing to his arms lying at a little distance from him.
Alwy

 giving them .
   There, be thou speedy.

Wog.

 putting on his armour .
   Curse on those loosen'd springs, they will not catch!
   Oh, all the goodly armour I have lost!
   Light curses on my head! if I do leave them
   Or spear, or shield, or robe, or household stuff,
   Or steed within their stalls, or horn or hoof
   Upon their grassy hills!
 Looking about. 
What want I now?
   Mine armour-man hath ta'en away my helm—
   Faith, and my target too! hell blast the buzzard!


 Exit furiously.
Alwy

 laughing .
   Ethwald, we have fulfill'd thy bidding well,
   With little cost of craft! But let us follow,
   And keep him to the bent.


 Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A small close grove, with a steep rocky bank at one end of it. Several Peasants are discovered standing upon the bank, as if looking at some distant sight.
 st peas.
   Good lack a day! how many living souls,
   In wide confused eddying motion mix'd,
   Like cross set currents on the restless face
   Of winter floods!

 d peas.
   Where fight the Northern Mercians?



 
 st peas.
                                            On the right.
   The gentle ethling, as I am inform'd,
   Fights likewise on the right: heav'n spare his head!
   'Tis his first battle.

 d peas.
   Hear, hear! still louder swells that horrid sound.

 st peas.
   Ay, many voices join in that loud din,
   Which soon shall shout no more.

 d peas.
                                            Ay, good neighbour,
   Full gloriously now looks that cover'd field,
   With all those moving ranks and glitt'ring arms;
   But he who shall return by setting sun
   Will see a sorry sight.


 A loud distant noise.
 st peas.
   Heav'n save us all! it is the warlike yell
   Of those damn'd Britons that increaseth so.
   By all the holy saints our men are worsted!

 An increasing noise heard without.
   Look! yonder look! they turn their backs and flee.

 d peas.
   O blasting shame! where fights brave Ethwald now?
   He is, I fear, far in the distant wing.
   Let us be gone! we are too near them here:
   The flight comes this way: hear that horrid sound!
   The saints preserve us!


 The sound of the battle increases, and is heard nearer. The peasants come hastily down from the bank, and exeunt. Enter Edward with several followers disordered and panicstricken.
 st fol.

 looking round .
   They cease to follow us: this tangled grove
   Has stopp'd the fell pursuit: here may we rest.


 Edward throws himself down at the root of a tree, and covers his face with his hands.
 d fol.

 filling his helmet with water from a stream, and presenting it to Edw .
   My prince, this cooling water will refresh you.

Edw.

 keeping his face still covered with one hand, and waving him off with the other .
   Away, away! and do not speak to me!


 A deep pause, the noise of the battle is again heard coming nearer.
 st fol.
   We must not tarry here.

 To Edw .
   My lord, the farther thickets of this wood
   Will prove a sure concealment: shall we move?

Edw.

 still covering his face .
   Let the earth gape and hide me.


 Another deep pause.
 d fol.

to  st.
   The sin of all this rout falls on thy head,
   Thou cursed Thane! thou and thy hireling knaves
   First turn'd your backs and fled.

 st fol.

to  d.
   Thou liest, foul tongue! it was thy kinsman there
   Who first did turn; for I was borne away,

 Pointing to th fol.
   Unwillingly away, by the rude stream
   Of his fear-stricken bands. When, till this hour,
   Did ever armed Briton see my back?

 th fol.
   Arm'd Britons dost thou call them?— devils they are!
   Thou knowst right well they deal with wicked sprites.
   Those horrid yells were not the cries of men;
   And fiends of hell look'd through their flashing eyes.
   I fear to face the power of simple man
   As little as thyself.


Enter more Fugitives.
 st fol.

 to Edw .
   Up, my good lord! Hence let us quickly move;
   We must not stay.

Edw.
   Then thrust me through and leave me.
   I'll flee no more.

 Looking up wildly, then fixing his eyes wistfully upon d follower, and bending one knee to the ground. 
   Ebbert, thy sword is keen, thy arm is strong;
   O, quickly do't! and I shall be with those
   Who feel nor shame nor panic.


 d fol. and several others turn their faces away and weep. Enter more fugitives.
 st fol.
   What, is all lost?

 st fug.
                                            Yes, yes! our wing is beaten.
   Seagurth alone, with a few desp'rate men,
   Still sets his aged breast against the storm:
   But thick the aimed weapons round him fly,
   Like huntsmen's arrows round the toiled boar.
   And he will soon be nothing.

Edw.

 starting up .
   O, God! O, living God! my noble father!
   He has no son!—Off, ye debasing fears!
   I'll tear thee forth, base heart, if thou dost let me.

 Coming forward and stretching out his arms.
   Companions, noble Mercians—Ah, false word!
   I may not call you noble. Yet, perhaps,
   One gen'rous spark within your bosom glows.
   Sunk in disgrace still lower than ye all,
   I may not urge—Who lists will follow me!

All with one voice.
   We will all follow thee!

Edw.
   Will ye, in truth? then we'll be brave men
   still.

 Brandishing his sword as he goes off.
   My noble father!


 Exeunt, clashing their arms.
SCENE II.
A confused noise of a battle is heard. The scene draws up and discovers the British and Mercian armies engaged. Near the front of the stage they are seen in close fight, and the ground strewed with several wounded and dead soldiers, as if they had been fighting for some time. Farther off, missile weapons and showers of arrows darken the air, and the view of the more distant battle is concealed in thick clouds of dust. The Mercians gain ground upon the Britons; and loud cries are raised by them to encourage one another. An active Mercian falls, and their progress is stopped whilst they endeavour to bear him off.
Fallen Mercian.
   I'm slain, I'm slain! tread o'er me, and push forward.



 
Mer. Chief.
   O stop not thus! to it again, brave Mercians!


 The Mercians push on, encouraging one another with cries and clashing of arms; one of their bravest soldiers is wounded on the front of the stage and staggers backwards.
Wounded Mer.
   Ay, this is death; O that my life had held
   To see the end of this most noble game!

 Falls down, but seeing the Mercians about to push the Britons off the stage, raises himself half from the ground and claps his hands exultingly.
   Well fought, brave Mercians! On, my noble Mercians!

 Sinks down again.
   I am in darkness now! a clod o' the earth!


 Dies.
Britons

 without .
   Fresh succour, Britons! courage! victory!
   Carwallen and fresh succour!


 The Britons now raise a terrible yell, and push back the Mercians, who yield ground and become spiritless and relaxed as their enemy becomes bolder. The Britons at last seize the Mercian standard, and raise another terrible yell, whilst the Mercians give way on every side.
 st falling Mer.
   Horror and death! the hand of wrath is o'er us!

 d falling Mer.
   A fell and fearful end! a bloody lair!
   The trampling foe to tread out brave men's breath.


 The Britons yell again, and the Mercians are nearly beat off the stage.

 Voice without. 
   Ethwald! the valiant Ethwald! succour, Mercians!

 Voice within. 
   Hear ye, brave comrades? Ethwald is at hand.


Enter Ethwald with his sword drawn.
Ethw.
   What, soldiers! yield ye thus, while vict'ry smiles
   And bids us on to th' bent? Your northern comrades
   Mock at their savage howls, and drive before them
   These chafed beasts of prey. Come! to it bravely!
   To it, and let their mountain matrons howl,
   For these will soon be silent.
   Give me the standard.

Voice.
                                            They have taken it.

Ethw.
   Taken! no, by the spirits of the brave!
   Standard of ours on Snowdon winds to float!
   No! this shall fetch it back!


 Taking off his helmet and throwing it into the midst of the enemy, then rushing upon them bare-headed and sword in hand. The Mercians clash their arms and raise a great shout: the Britons are driven off the stage; whilst many of the dying Mercians clap their hands and raise a feeble shout after their comrades. The scene closes.
SCENE III.
An open space before a royal tent; the curtains of which are drawn up, and show a company of warriors and dames within it. On either side of the open stage soldiers are drawn up in order. Enter two petty Thanes on the front of the stage.
 st Thane.
   Here let us stand and see the ceremony.
   Without the tent, 'tis said the king will crown
   The gallant ethling with a wreath of honour,
   As the chief agent in this victory
   O'er stern Carwallen and his Britons gain'd.

 d Thane.
   Thou sayest well. Within the royal tent
   They wait, as I am told, the ethling's coming,
   Who is full tardy. Softly, they come forth. 
   How like a ship with all her goodly sails
   Spread to the sun, the haughty princess moves!


 A flourish of trumpets. Enter from the tent the King, with Ethelbert, Edrick , Thanes, and attendants; and Elburga , with Dwina and ladies. They advance towards the front of the stage.
King.
   Nay, sweet Elburga, clear thy frowning brow;
   He who is absent will not long delay
   His pleasing duty here.

Elb.
   On such a day, my lord, the brave I honour,
   As those who have your royal arms maintain'd
   In war's iron field, such honour meriting.
   What individual chiefs, or here or absent,
   May therein be concern'd, I little care;
   I deign not to regard it.

King.
   Thou art offended, daughter, but unwisely.
   Plumed with the fairest honours of the field,
   Such pious grief for a brave father's death,
   Bespeaks a heart such as a gentle maid
   In her faith-plighted lord should joy to find.

Elb.
   Who best the royal honours of a prince
   Maintains, best suits a royal maiden's love.

King.
   Elburga, thou forgetst that gentleness
   Which suits thy gentle kind.

Elb.

 with much assumed stateliness .
   I hope, my lord,
   I do meantime that dignity remember,
   Which doth beseem the daughter of a king!

King.
   Fie! clear thy cloudy brow! it is my will
   Thou honour graciously his modest worth.

 Elb . bows, but smiles disdainfully.
   By a well feigned flight, he was the first
   Who broke the stubborn foe, op'ning the road
   To victory. Here, with some public mark
   Of royal favour, by the hand receiv'd,


 
   I will to honour him; for, since the battle,
   A gloomy melancholy o'er him broods,
   E'en far exceeding what a father's death
   Should cast upon a youthful victor's triumph.
   Ah! here he comes! look on that joyless face!

Elb.

 aside to Dwina , looking scornfully to Edward as he approaches .
   Look with what slow and piteous gait he comes!
   Like younger brother of a petty Thane,
   Timing his footsteps to his father's dirge.

Dwina.

 aside .
   Nay, to my fancy it is wond'rous graceful.

Elb.

 contemptuously .
   A youth, indeed, who might with humble grace
   Beneath thy window tell his piteous tale.


Enter Edward followed by Ethwald and attend-ants.
King.
   Approach, my son: so will I call thee now.
   Here is a face whose smiles should gild thy honours
   If thou art yet awake to beauty's power.

Edw.

 kissing Elburga 's hand respectfully .
   Honour'd I am indeed; most dearly honour'd;
   I feel it here
 his hand on his heart ,
and should be joyful too,
   If aught could gild my gloom.

 Sighs very deeply, then suddenly recollecting himself.
   Elburga, thou wert ever fond of glory,
   And ever quick to honour valiant worth;
   Ethwald, my friend—hast thou forgotten Ethwald?


 Presenting Ethw . to her.
Elb.
   Could I forget the warlike Thane of Mairnieth,
   I must have barr'd mine ears against all sound;
   For every voice is powerful in his praise,
   And every Mercian tongue repeats his name.


 Smiling graciously upon Ethw .
King

 impatiently .
   Where go we now? we wander from our purpose.
   Edward, thy youthful ardour season'd well
   With warlike craft, has crown'd my age with glory;
   Here be thy valour crown'd, it is my will,
   With honour's wreath, from a fair hand receiv'd.


 Giving the wreath to Elburga .
Edw.

 earnestly .
   I do beseech you, uncle!—pray receive
   My grateful thanks! the mournful cypress best
   Becomes my brow; this honour must not be.

King.
   Nay, lay aside unseemly diffidence;
   It must be so.

Edw.

 impressively .
   My heart is much depress'd:
   O do not add
   The burden of an undeserved honour,
   To bend me to the earth!

King.
   These warlike chieftains say it is deserv'd,
   And nobly earn'd. It is with their concurrence
   That now I offer thee this warrior's wreath;
   Yes, ethling, and command thee to receive it.

 Holding up his hand. 
   There, let the trumpet sound.


 Trumpets sound.
Edw.

 holding up his hands distractedly .
   Peace, peace! nor put me to this agony!

 Trumpets cease.
   And am I then push'd to this very point?
   Well, then, away deceit! too long hast thou
   Like the incumbent monster of a dream
   On the stretch'd sleeper's breast, depress'd my soul;
   I shake thee off, foul mate! O, royal sire,
   And you, ye valiant Mercians, hear the truth!
   Ye have believ'd, that by a feigned flight,
   I gain'd the first advantage o'er the foe,
   And broke their battle's strength; O would I had!
   That flight, alas! was real; the sudden impulse
   Of a weak mind, unprov'd and strongly struck
   With new and horrid things, until that hour
   Unknown and unimagin'd.—
   Nor was it honour's voice that call'd me back;
   The call of nature saved me. Noble Seagurth,
   Had I been son of any sire but thee,
   I had in dark and endless shame been lost,
   Nor e'er again before these valiant men
   Stood in this royal presence.
   In all my fortune, I am blest alone
   That my brave father, rescued by these arms,
   Look'd on me, smiling through the shades of death,
   And knew his son. He was a noble man!
   He never turn'd from danger—but his son—

 Many voices at once. 
   His son is worthy of him!

 Repeated again with more voices. 
   His son is worthy of him!

Ethelbert with enthusiasm.
   His son is worthy
   Of the noblest sire that ever wielded sword!

Voices.
   Crown him, fair princess! Crown the noble Edward!


 Elburga offers him the wreath, which he puts aside vehemently.
Edw.
   Forbear! a band of scorpions round my brow
   Would not torment me like this laurel wreath.


 Elb . turns from him contemptuously, and gives the wreath to the King.
Edw.

 to King .
   What, good my lord! is there not present here
   A Mercian brow deserving of that wreath?
   Shall he, who did with an uncover'd head
   Your battle fight, still wear his brows unbound?
   Do us not this disgrace!

King

 fretfully .
   Thou dost forget the royal dignity:
   Take it away.


Giving it to an officer.

 A confused murmuring amongst the soldiers.  Aside to the seneschal, alarmed. 
   What noise is that?



 
Sen.

 aside to King .
   Your troops, my sire, are much dissatisfied,
   For that their favourite chief by you is deem'd
   Unworthy of the wreath.

King

 aside .
   What, is it so? call back mine officer.

 Taking the wreath again, and giving it to Elb. 
   This wreath was meant for one of royal line,
   But every noble Mercian, great in arms,
   Is equal to a prince.
   Crown the most valiant Ethwald.

Elb.

 crowning Ethw . with great assumed majesty .
   Long may thy laurels flourish on thy brow,
   Most noble chief!


 Ethw . takes the wreath and presses it to his lips, bowing to Elb ., then to the King.
Ethw.
   They who beneath the royal banner fight,
   Unto the fortunes of their royal chief
   Their success owe. Honour'd, indeed, am I
   That the brave ethling hath so favour'd me,
   And that I may, most humbly at your feet,
   My royal sire, this martial garland lay.


 He, kneeling, lays the wreath at the King's feet; the King raises him up and embraces him; the soldiers clash their arms and call out.
Sold.
   Long live the king! and long live noble Ethwald!


 This is several times repeated. Exeunt King , Edward, Elburga , &c. &c. ; Elburga looking graciously to Ethwald as she goes off. Manent Ethwald and Ethelbert .
Eth.

 repeating indignantly as they go off .
   Long live the king, and long live noble Ethwald!
   Fie on the stupid clowns, that did not join
   The gen'rous Edward's name!

 To Ethw ., who is standing looking earnestly after the princess. 
   What dost thou gaze on?

Ethw.
   The princess look'd behind her as she went.

Eth.
   And what is that to thee?

 Walks silently across the stage once or twice gloomy and dissatisfied, then turning short upon Ethw .
   When wert thou last to see the lovely Bertha?

Ethw.

 hesitating .
   I cannot reckon it unto the day—
   Some moons ago.

Eth.
   Some moons! the moon in her wide course shines not
   Upon a maid more lovely.

Ethw.
                                            I know it well.

Eth.
   Thou dost.

Ethw.

 after a pause, looking attentively to Eth ., who stands muttering to himself .
   Methinks thou holdest converse with thyself.

Eth.

 speaking aloud, as if he continued to talk to himself .
   She steps upon the flowery bosom'd earth,
   As though it were a foot-cloth fitly placed
   Beneath the tread of her majestic step;
   And looks upon the human countenance,
   Whereon her Maker hath the signs impress'd
   Of all that He within the soul hath stored
   Of great and noble, gen'rous and benign,
   As on a molten plate, made to reflect
   Her grandeur and perfections.

Ethw.
   Of whom speakst thou?

Eth.
   Not of the gentle Bertha.


 Exit.
Ethw.
   What may he mean? He mark'd, with much displeasure,
   The soldiers shout my name, and now my favour
   With Mercia's princess frets him. What of this?
   Ha! hath his active mind outrun mine own
   In shaping future consequences? Yes,
   It must be so, a curtain is withdrawn,
   And to mine eye a goodly prospect shown,
   Extending—No, I must not look upon it.


 Exit hastily.
SCENE IV.
An open space, with arms, garments, and other spoils of the Britons heaped up on every side of the stage. Enter Soldiers, and range themselves in order; then enter Ethelbert and a Soldier, talking as they enter.
Eth.
   Ethwald among his soldiers, dost thou say,
   Divides his spoil?

Sol.
   He does, most bountifully;
   Nor to himself more than a soldier's share
   Retains, he is so gen'rous and so noble.

Eth.
   I thank thee, friend.

 Soldier retires.  After a pause. 
   I like not this: behind those heaps I'll stand,
   And mark the manner of this distribution.


 Retires.

Enter Alwy and a petty Thane.
Alwy.
   Brave warriors! ye are come at his desire,
   Who for each humble soldier, bold in arms,
   That has beneath his orders fought, still bears
   A brother's heart. You see these goodly spoils:
   He gives them not unto the cloister'd priests:
   His soldiers pray for him.


 Soldiers shout.
Thane

 to Alwy .
   What is thy meaning?

Alwy.
   Knowest thou not the king has now bestow'd
   The chiefest portion of his British spoil
   On Alban's abbey?


Enter Ethwald .

 Soldiers shouting very loud. 
   Long live brave Ethwald! health to noble Ethwald!

Ethw.
   Thanks for these kindly greetings, valiant hearts!

 Soldiers shout again very loud.
   In truth I stand before you, brave companions,


 
   Somewhat asham'd; for with my wishes match'd,
   These hands are poor and empty.

 Loud acclamations.
   I thank you all again; for well I see
   You have respect unto the dear good will
   That must enrich these heaps of homely stuff.

Soldiers.
   Long live our gen'rous leader!

Ethw.

 giving a soldier a helmet filled with lots .
   Here, take the lots and deal them fairly round.
   Heaven send to all of you, my valiant friends,
   A portion to your liking. This rough heap

 Pointing to the arms.
   Will give at least to each some warlike trophy,
   Which henceforth, hung upon his humble walls,
   Shall tell his sons and grandsons yet to come
   In what proud fields, and with what gallant mates
   Their father fought. And I, methinks, well pleas'd,
   Resting, as heretofore I oft have done,
   My wand'ring steps beneath your friendly roofs,
   Shall, looking up, the friendly token spy,
   And in my host a fellow soldier hail.

Soldiers

 with loud acclamations .
   God bless you, noble chief! unto the death
   We'll hold to you, brave leader!

Ethw.
   And if to you I hold not, valiant Mercians,
   No noble chief am I. This motley gear,

 Pointing to the spoils.
   Would it were all composed of precious things,
   That to his gentle wife or favour'd maid,
   Each soldier might have borne some goodly gift!
   But tell them, British matrons cross the woof
   With coarser hands than theirs.

 st sol.
   Saint Alban bless his noble countenance!
   'Twas fashion'd for bestowing.

 d sol.
   Heav'n store his halls with wealth!

Ethw.

 going familiarly amongst the soldiers as the lots are drawing .
   Well, Ogar, hast thou drawn? good luck to thee.
   And thou, good Baldwin, too? Yet fie upon it!
   The heaviest weapon of the British host
   Lacks weight of metal for thy sinewy arm.—
   Ha! health to thee, mine old and honest host!
   I'm glad to see thee with thine arm unbound.
   And ruddy too! thy dame should give me thanks:
   I send thee home to her a younger man
   Than I receiv'd thee.

 To the soldier with the lots who is passing him. 
   Nay, stay thee, friend, I pray, nor pass me o'er,
   We all must share alike: hold out thy cap.

 Smiling as he draws.
   The knave would leave me out.


 Loud acclamations, the soldiers surrounding him and clashing their arms.

Enter Selred and Followers.
Sel.

 to sol. 
   Ha! whence comes all this uproar?

Sol.
   Know you not?
   Your noble brother 'midst his soldiers shares
   His British spoils.

Sel.
   The grateful knaves! is all their joy for this?

 To his followers.
   Well, go and add to it my portion also;
   'Twill make them roar the louder. Do it quickly.


 Exit.
Soldiers

 looking after Sel ..
   Heaven bless him
   too, plain, honest, careless soul!
   He gives as though he gave not.

 Loud acclamations.
   Long live brave Ethwald, and the noble Selred!

Ethw.

 aside to Alwy , displeased .
   How came he here?

Alwy.
   I cannot tell.

Ethw.

 to sol. 
   We are confined within this narrow space:
   Go range yourselves at large on yon green sward,
   And there we'll spread the lots.


 Exeunt; the soldiers arranging themselves as they go.
SCENE V.
An apartment in a royal castle. Enter Ethelbert , and leans his back upon a pillar near the front of the stage, as if deeply engaged in gloomy thoughts: afterwards enters Ethwald by the opposite side, at the bottom of the stage, and approaches Eth . slowly, observing him attentively as he advances.
Ethw.
   Thou art disturbed, Ethelbert.

Eth.
   I am.

Ethw.
   Thine eyes roll strangely, as though thou beheldst
   Some dreadful thing:—
   On what lookst thou?

Eth.
                                            Upon my country's ruin.
   The land is full of blood: her savage birds
   O'er human carcases do scream and batten:
   The silent hamlet smokes not; in the field
   The aged grandsire turns the joyless soil:
   Dark spirits are abroad, and gentle worth
   Within the narrow house of death is laid,
   An early tenant.

Ethw.
                                            Thou'rt beside thyself!
   Thinkst thou that I, with these good arms, will stand
   And suffer all this wreck?

Eth.
   Ha! sayst thou so? Alas, it is thyself
   Who rul'st the tempest!


 Shaking his head solemnly.
Ethw.
   If that I bear the spirit of a man,
   Thou falsely seest! Thinkst thou I am a beast;
   A fanged wolf, reft of all kindly sense,
   That I should do such deeds?
   I am a man aspiring to be great,
   But loathing cruelty: who wears a sword
   That will protect and not destroy the feeble.


 Putting his hand vehemently upon his sword.
Eth.
   Ha! art thou roused? blessings on thy wrath!
   I'll trust thee still. But see, the ethling comes,
   And on his face he wears a smile of joy.



 

Enter Edward , advancing gaily to Ethwald .
Edw.
   A boon, a boon, great Mairnieth's Thane, I crave.

Eth.
   You come not with a suppliant's face, my lord.

Edw.
   Not much cast down for lack of confidence
   My suit to gain. That envious braggart there,
   The chief of Bournoth, says, no Mercian arm,
   Of man now living, can his grandsire's sword
   In warlike combat wield: and, in good sooth!
   I forfeit forty of my fattest kine
   If Ethwald's arm does not the feat achieve.

 To Ethw .
   What sayst thou, friend? Methinks thou'rt grave and silent:
   Hast thou so soon thy noble trade forgot?
   Have at it then! I'll rouse thy spirit up:
   I'll soldier thee again.

 Drawing his sword playfully upon Ethwald , who defends himself in like manner.
   Fie on't! that was a wicked northern push:
   It tells of thine old sports in Mollo's walls.

 Pauses and fights again.
   To it again! How listless thou art grown!
   Where is thy manhood gone?

Ethw.
   Fear not, my lord, enough remains behind
   To win your forty kine.

Edw.
   I'll take thy word for't now: in faith, I'm tired!
   I've been too eager in the morning's chace
   To fight your noonday battles.

 Putting the point of his sword to the ground, and leaning familiarly upon Ethwald.
   My arm, I fear, would make but little gain
   With Bournoth's sword. By arms and brave men's love!
   I could not brook to see that wordy braggart
   Perching his paltry sire above thy pitch;
   It rais'd my fiend within. When I am great,
   I'll build a tower upon the very spot
   Where thou didst first the British army stay,
   And shame the grandsires of those mighty Thanes
   Six ages deep. Lean I too hard upon thee?

Ethw.
   No, nothing hard: most pleasant and most kindly.
   Take your full rest, my lord.

Edw.
   In truth, I do: methinks it does me good
   To rest upon thy brave and valiant breast.

Eth.

 stepping before them with great animation .
   Well said, most noble Edward!
   The bosom of the brave is that on which
   Rests many a head: but most of all, I trow,
   Th' exposed head of princely youth thereon
   Rests gracefully.


 Steps back some paces, and looks at them with delight.
Edw.
   You look upon us, Thane, with eager eyes
   And looks of meaning.

Eth.
                                            Pardon me, I pray!
   My fancy oftentimes will wildly play,
   And strong conceits possess me.
   Indulge my passing freak: I am a man
   Upon whose grizzled head the work of time
   Hath been by care perform'd, and, with the young,
   Claiming the priv'lege of a man in years.

 Taking the hands of Edw . and Ethw . and joining them together.
   This is a lovely sight! indulge my fancy:
   And on this sword, it is a brave man's sword,
   Swear that you will unto each other prove,
   As prince and subject, true.

Edw.
   No, no, good Thane!
   As friends, true friends! that doth the whole include.
   I kiss the honour'd blade.


 Kissing the sword held out by Eth .
Eth.

 presenting the sword to Ethw .
   And what says noble Ethwald?

Ethw.
   All that the brave should say.


 Kissing it also. 
Eth.

 triumphantly .
   Now, Mercia, thou art strong! give me your hands;
   Faith, I must lay them both upon my breast!

 Pressing both their hands to his breast.
   This is a lovely sight!

Ethw.

 softened .
   You weep, good Ethelbert.

Eth.

 brushing off his tears with his hand .
   Yes, yes! such tears as doth the warm shower'd earth
   Show to the kindly sun.

Edw.

 to Eth ., gently clapping his shoulder .
   I love this well: thou like a woman weepest,
   And fightest like a man. But look, I pray!
   There comes my arms-man with the braggart's sword:
   Let us essay it yonder.


 Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
An apartment in a royal castle. Ethwald is discovered sitting in deep meditation by the side of a couch, with a lamp burning by him on a high stand: the rest of the stage entirely dark.
Ethw.
   Why am I haunted with these thoughts?
   What boots it
   That from their weak and priest-beridden king
   The soldiers turn distasteful, and on me
   In mutter'd wishes call? What boots all this?
   Occasion fairly smiles, but I am shackled;
   Elsewhere I needs must turn my climbing thoughts,
   But where? The youthful see around them spread
   A boundless field of undetermin'd things,
   Towering in tempting greatness:
   But, to the closer scan of men matured,


 
   These fade away, and in the actual state
   Of times and circumstances each perceives
   A path which doth to his advancement lead,
   And only one; as to the dazzled eye
   Of the night rev'ller, o'er his emptied bowl,
   The multiplied and many whirling lights
   Do shrink at last into one single torch,
   Shedding a steady ray. I see my path:
   But what is that to me? my steps are chain'd.
   Amongst the mighty great, the earth's high lords,
   There is no place for me! I must lie down
   In the dark tomb with those, whose passing brightness
   Shines for a while, but leaves no ray behind.


 Throws himself half upon the couch and groans heavily.

Enter Boy.
Boy.
   My lord, my lord!

 Ethw . lifts up his head, and looks sternly at him. 
                                            Are you unwell, my lord?

Ethw.
   What dost thou want?

Boy.
   I could not sleep: and as I list'ning lay
   To the drear wind that whistles through these towers,
   Methought I heard you groan like one in pain.

Ethw.
   Away, and go to sleep: I want thee not:
   I say, begone
 sternly .  Exit boy.

 He pauses awhile, then sighs very deeply.

   He hangs upon me like a dead man's grasp
   On the wreck'd swimmer's neck—his boyish love
   Was not my seeking; it was fasten'd on me,
   And now it hath become an iron band
   To fetter down my powers. O that I were
   Amidst the warlike and ungentle cast
   To strive uncumber'd! What have I to do
   With soft affection?
 Softened. 
Yet it needs must be!
   His gen'rous love:—his brave ungrudging love:
   His manly gentle love—O that he had
   Mine equal friend been born, who in my rise
   Had fair advancement found, and by my side
   The next in honour stood!
   He drags me to the earth! I needs must lay
   My head i' the dust.—Dull hopeless privacy!
   From it my soul recoils: unto my nature
   It is the death of death, horrid and hateful.

 Starting up eagerly. 
   No, in the tossed bark,
   Commander of a rude tumultuous crew,
   On the wild ocean would I rather live;
   Or in the mined caverns of the earth
   Untamed bands of lawless men control,
   By crime and dire necessity enleagued:
   Yea, in the dread turmoil of midnight storms,
   If such there be, lead on the sable hosts
   Of restless sprites, than say to mortal man
   “Thou art my master.”


Enter Boy.
                                            What, here again?

Boy.
   O pardon me, my lord! I am in fear;
   Strange sounds do howl and hurtle round my bed;
   I cannot rest.

Ethw.
   Begone, thou wakeful pest! I say, be-gone!
 Exit boy.

 Ethw . walks several times across the stage and then pauses.

   Yet in my mind one ever-present thought
   Rises omnipotent o'er all the rest,
   And says, “Thou shalt be great.”
   What may this mean? before me is no way.
   What deep endued seer will draw this veil
   Of dark futurity? Of such I've heard,
   But when the troubled seek for them, they are not.


Re-enter Boy.

 Stamping with his foot. 
   What! here a third time?

Boy

 falling at his feet .
   O, my noble master!
   If you should slay me I must come to you;
   For in my chamber fearful things there be,
   That sound i' the dark; O, do not chide me back.

Ethw.
   Strange sound within thy chamber, foolish wight!

Boy

 starting .
   Good mercy, list!

Ethw.
   It is some night-bird screaming on the tower.

Boy.
   Ay, so belike it seemeth, but I know—

Ethw.
   What dost thou know?

Boy.
   It is no bird, my lord.

Ethw.
   What wouldst thou say?

Boy

 clasping his hands together, and staring earnestly in Ethw . 's face .
   At dead of night, from the dark Druid's cave
   Up rise unhallow'd sprites, and o'er the earth
   Hold for the term their wicked rule. Aloft,
   Some mounted on the heavy sailing cloud,
   Oft pour down noisome streams or biting hail
   On the benighted hind, and from his home,
   With wayward eddying blasts, still beat him back.
   Some on the waters shriek like drowning men,
   And, when the pitying passenger springs forth,
   To lend his aid, the dark flood swallows him.
   Some on lone marshes shine like moving lights;
   And some on towers and castle turrets perch'd,
   Do scream like nightly birds, to scare the good,
   Or rouse the murd'rer to his bloody work.

Ethw.
   The Druid's cave, sayst thou? What cave is that?
   Where is it? Who hath seen it? What scar'd fool
   Hath fill'd thine ears with all these horrid things?

Boy.
   It is a cavern vast and terrible,
   Under the ground full deep; perhaps, my lord,
   Beneath our very feet, here as we stand;
   For few do know the spot and centre of it,
   Though many mouths it has and entries dark.
   Some are like hollow pits bor'd through the earth,
   O'er which the list'ning herdsman bends his ear,
   And hears afar their lakes of molten fire
   Swelt'ring and boiling like a mighty pot.
   Some like strait passes through the rifted rocks,


 
   From which oft issue shrieks, and whistling gusts,
   And wailings dismal. Nay, some, as they say,
   Deep hollow'd underneath the river's bed,
   Which show their narrow op'nings through the fern
   And tangling briars, like dank and noisome holes
   Wherein foul adders breed. But not far hence
   The chiefest mouth of all, 'midst beetling rocks
   And groves of blasted oaks, gapes terrible.

Ethw.
   So near? but who are they who dwell within?

Boy.
   The female high Arch Druid therein holds 
   With many Druids tending on her will,
   Old, as they say, some hundred years or more
   Her court, where horrid spells bind to her rule
   Spirits of earth and air.

Ethw.
                                            Ay, so they tell thee,
   But who is he that has held converse with her?

Boy.
   Crannock, the bloody prince, did visit her,
   And she did show to him the bloody end
   Whereto he soon should come; for all she knows
   That is, or has been, or shall come to pass.

Ethw.
   Yes, in times past such intercourse might be,
   But who has seen them now?

Boy.
                                            Thane Ethelbert.

Ethw.

 starting .
   What saidst thou, Ethelbert?

Boy.
   Yes, truly; oft he goes to visit them
   What time the moon rides in her middle course.

Ethw.
   Art thou assured of this?

Boy.
   A youth who saw him issue from the cave;
   'Twas he who told it me.

Ethw.
                                            Mysterious man!

 After a pause. 
   Where sleeps the Thane?

Boy.
   If walls and doors may hold him,
   He sleeps not distant, in the southern tower.

Ethw.
   Take thou that lamp, and go before me then.

Boy.
   Where?

Ethw.
   To the southern tower. Art thou afraid?

Boy.
   No, my good lord, but keep you close behind.


 Exeunt; Boy bearing the lamp, and looking often behind to see that Ethw . is near him.
SCENE II.
A small gallery or passage with a door in front, which is opened, and enter Ethwald , and Ethelbert with a lamp in his hand.
Eth.
   Then, by the morrow's midnight moon, we meet
   At the Arch Sister's cave: till then, farewell!

Ethw.
   Farewell! I will be punctual.


 Exit.
Eth.

 looking after him for some time before he speaks .
   It ever is the mark'd propensity
   Of restless and aspiring minds to look
   Into the stretch of dark futurity.
   But be it so: it now may turn to good.


 Exit, returning back again into the same chamber from which he came.
SCENE III.
A wide arched cave, rude but grand, seen by a sombre light, a small furnace burning near the front of the stage. Enter Ethwald and Ethelbert , who pause and look round for some time without speaking.
Ethw.
   Gloomy, and void, and silent!

Eth.
   Hush!

Ethw.
   What hearest thou?

Eth.
   Their hollow sounding steps. Lo! seest thou not?
Pointing to the further end of the stage, where, from an obscure recess, enter three Mystics robed in white, and ranged on one side of the stage, point to Ethwald : whilst from another obscure recess enter three Mystic Sisters, and ranged on the opposite side point to Ethwald : then from a mid recess enters the Arch Sister robed also in white, but more majestic than the others, and a train of Mystics and Mystic Sisters behind her. She advances half-way up the stage, then stops short, and points also to Ethwald .

 All the Mystics, &c. speaking at once. 

   Who art thou?

Arch Sist.
   I know thee who thou art; the hand of Mercia.
   The hand that lifts itself above the head.
   I know thee who thou art.

Ethw.
   Then haply ye do know my errand too.

Arch Sist.
   I do; but turn thee back upon thy steps,
   And tempt thy fate no farther.

Ethw.
   From the chaf'd shore turn back the swelling tide!
   I came to know my fate, and I will know it.

 st Mystic.
   Must we call up from the deep centre's womb
   The spirits of the night and their dread lord?

 st Myst. S.
   Must we do that which makes the entombed dead
   From coffins start?

Ethw.
   Raise the whole host of darkness an ye will,
   But I must be obey'd.


 The Arch Sister shrieks, and, throwing her mantle over her face, turns to go away.


 
Ethw.
   If there be power in mortal arm to hold you,
   Ye stir not hence until I am obey'd.

 st Myst.
   And how compellest thou?

Ethw.
                                            With this good sword.

 st Myst.
   Swords here are children's wands of no avail:
   There, warrior, is thy weapon.

Ethw.
                                            Where, Mystic? say.

 st Myst.

 pointing to the furnace .
   Behold within that fire
   A bar of burning iron! pluck it forth.

Ethw.

 resolutely .
                                            I will.


 Goes to the furnace, and putting in his hand, pulls out what seems a red hot bar of iron.
Arch Sist.

 throwing off her mantle .
   Thou hast subdued me; thou shalt be obey'd.

Ethw.

 casting away the bar .
   Away, thou paltry terror!

Arch Sist.

 to Ethw .
   We now begin our rites: be firm, be silent.


 She stretches forth her hand with a commanding air, and the Mystics and Mystic Sisters begin their incantations at the bottom of the stage, moving round in several mazy circles one within another. Fire is at last seen flashing from the midst of the inner circle, and immediately they all begin a hollow muttering sound, which becomes louder and louder, till at length it is accompanied with dismal sounds from without, and distant music, solemn and wild.
Ethw.

 grasping Ethelbert 's hand .
   What dismal sounds are these?
   'Tis like a wild responsive harmony,
   Tun'd to the answ'ring yells of damned souls.
   What follows this? Some horrid thing! Thou smilest:
   Nay, press thy hand, I pray thee, on my breast;
   There wilt thou find no fear,

Eth.
   Hush! hear that distant noise.

Ethw.
   'Tis thunder in the bowels of the earth,
   Heard from afar.


 A subterraneous noise like thunder is heard at a distance, becoming louder as it approaches. Upon hearing this, the Mystics suddenly leave off their rites; the music ceases, and they, opening their circles, range themselves on either side of the stage, leaving the Arch Sister alone in the middle.
Arch Sist.

 holding up her hand .
   Mystics, and Mystic Maids, and leagued bands!
   The master spirit comes: prepare.

 All repeat after her .
   Prepare.

 st Mystic.
   Hark! through the darken'd realms below,
   Through the fiery regions glow:
   Through the massy mountain's core,
   Through the mines of living ore;
   Through the yawning caverns wide,
   Through the solid and the void;
   Through the dank and through the dry,
   Through th' unseen of mortal eye:
   Upon the earthquake's secret course, afar
   I hear the sounding of thy car:
   Sulphureous vapours load the rising gale;
   We know thy coming; mighty master, hail!

 They all repeat. 
   Mighty master, hail!


 The stage darkens by degrees, and a thick vapour begins to ascend at the bottom of the stage.
 d Mystic.
   Hark, hark! what murmurs fill the dome!
   Who are they who with thee come?
   Those who, in their upward flight,
   Rouse the tempests of the night:
   Those who ride in flood and fire;
   Those who rock the tumbling spire:
   Those who, on the bloody plain,
   Shriek with the voices of the slain:
   Those who through the darkness glare,
   And the sleepless murd'rer scare;
   Those who take their surly rest
   On the troubled dreamer's breast:
   Those who make their nightly den
   In the guilty haunts of men:
   Through the heavy air I hear
   Their hollow trooping onward bear:
   The torch's shrinking flame is dim and pale:
   I know thy coming; mighty master, hail!

 All repeat again .
   Mighty master, hail!


 The stage becomes still darker, and a thicker vapour ascends.
 d Mystic.
   Lo! the mystic volumes rise!
   Wherein are lapt from mortal eyes
   Horrid deeds as yet unthought,
   Bloody battles yet unfought:
   The sudden fall and deadly wound
   Of the tyrant yet uncrown'd;
   And his line of many dyes
   Who yet within the cradle lies.
   Moving forms, whose stilly bed
   Long hath been among the dead;
   Moving forms, whose living morn
   Breaks with the nations yet unborn,
   In mystic vision walk the horrid pale:
   We own thy presence; mighty master, hail!

 All .
   Mighty master, hail!


Enter from the farther end of the stage crowds of terrible spectres, dimly seen through the vapour, which now spreads itself over the whole stage. All the Mystics and Mystic Sisters bow themselves very low, and the Arch Sister, standing alone in the middle, bows to all the different sides of the cave.
Ethw.

 to  st Mystic .
   To every side the mystic
   mistress bows,


 
   What meaneth this? mine eye no form perceives:
   Where is your mighty chief?

 st Mystic.
   Above, around you, and beneath.

Ethw.
   Has he no form to vision sensible?

 st Mystic.
   In the night's noon, in the winter's
   noon, in the lustre's noon:
   Of times twice ten within the century's round
   Is he before our leagued bands confess'd
   In dread appearance:
   But in what form or in what circumstance
   May not be told; he dies who utters it.


Ethw . shrinks at this, and seems somewhat appalled. The Arch Sister, after tossing about her arms, and writhing her body in a violent agitation, fixes her eyes, like one waked from a dream, steadfastly upon Ethw .; then going suddenly up to him, grasps him by the hand with energy.
Arch Sist.
   Thou who wouldst pierce the deep and awful shade
   Of dark futurity, to know the state
   Of after greatness waiting on thy will,
   For in thy power acceptance or rejection
   Is freely put, lift up thine eyes and say,
   What seest thou yonder?


 Pointing to a dark arched opening in the roof of the cave, where an illuminated crown and sceptre appear.
Ethw.

 starting .
   Ha! e'en the inward vision of my soul
   In actual form pourtray'd!

 His eyes brightening wonderfully.
   Sayst thou it shall be mine?

Arch Sist.
   As thou shalt choose.

Ethw.
   I ask of thee no more.

 Stands gazing upon the appearance till it fades away.
   So soon extinguish'd? Hath this too a meaning?
   It says, perhaps, my greatness shall be short.

Arch Sist.
   I speak to thee no further than I may,
   Therefore be satisfied.

Ethw.
   And I am satisfied. Dread mystic maid,
   Receive my thanks.

Arch Sist.
   Nay, Ethwald, our commission ends not here,
   Stay and behold what follows.


 The stage becomes suddenly dark, and most terrible shrieks, and groans, and dismal lamentations, are heard from the farther end of the cave.
Ethw.
   What horrid sounds are these?

Arch Sist.
   The varied voice of woe, of Mercia's woe:
   Of those who shall, beneath thine iron hand,
   The cup of mis'ry drink. There, dost thou hear
   The dungeon'd captives' sighs, the shrilly shrieks
   Of childless mothers and distracted maids,
   Mix'd with the heavy groans of dying men!
   The widow's wailings, too, and infant's cries—

 Ethw . stops his ears in horror.
   Ay, stop thine ears; it is a horrid sound.

Ethw.
   Forefend that e'er again I hear the like!
   What didst thou say? O, thou didst foully say!
   Do I not know my nature? heav'n and earth
   As soon shall change—

 A voice above. 
   Swear not!

 A voice beneath. 
   Swear not!

 A voice on the same level, but distant. 
   Swear not!

Arch Sist.
   Now, once again, and our commission ends.
   Look yonder, and behold that shadowy form.

Pointing to an arched recess, across which bursts a strong light, and discovers a crowned phantom, covered with wounds, and representing by its gestures one in agony. Ethw . looks and shrinks back.
   What dost thou see?

Ethw.
   A miserable man: his breast is pierced
   With many wounds, and yet his gestures seem
   The agony of a distracted mind,
   More than of pain.

Arch. Sist.
                                            But wears he not a crown?

Ethw.
   Why does it look so fix'dly on me thus?
   What are its woes to me?

Arch Sist.
                                            They are thy own.
   Knowst thou no traces of that alter'd form,
   Nor seest that crowned phantom is thyself?

Ethw.

 shudders, then after a pause .
   I may be doom'd to meet a tyrant's end,
   But not to be a tyrant.
   Did all the powers of hell attest the doom,
   I would belie it. Know I not my nature?
   By every dreaded power and hallow'd thing—

 Voice over the stage. 
   Swear not!

 Voice under the stage. 
   Swear not!

 Distant voice off the stage. 
   Swear not!


 Thundering noise is heard under ground. The stage becomes instantly quite dark, and Mystics and Spirits, &c. disappear , Ethw . and Eth . remaining alone.
Eth.

 after a pause .
   How art thou?

Ethw.
   Is it thy voice? O, let me feel thy grasp!
   Mine ears ring strangely, and my head doth feel
   As though I were bereaved of my wits.
   Are they all gone? Where is thy hand, I pray?
   We've had a fearful bout!

Eth.
   Thy touch is cold as death: let us ascend
   And breathe the upper air. 


 Exeunt.


 
SCENE IV.
A forest. Enter Ethwald with a bow in his hand, and a Boy carrying his arrows.
Ethw.

 looking off the stage .
   Ha! Alwy, soon return'd! and with him comes
   My faithful Ongar.


Enter Alwy and Ongar with bows also, as if in quest of sport, by the opposite side.
   Thou comest, Alwy, with a busy face.

 To boy. 
   Go, Boy; I shot mine arrow o'er those elms,
   Thou'lt find it far beyond.

 Exit boy.
   Now, friend, what tidings?

Alwy.
   Within the tufted centre of the wood
   The friendly chiefs are met, thus, like ourselves
   As careless ramblers guised, all to a man
   Fix'd in your cause. Their followers too are firm;
   For, much disgusted with the monkish face
   Their feeble monarch wears, a warlike leader,
   Far, far inferior to the noble Ethwald,
   May move them as he lists.

Ethw.
   That time and circumstances on me call
   Imperiously, I am well assured.
   Good Ongar, what sayst thou? how thrives thy part
   Of this important task!

Ong.
   Well as your heart could wish. At the next council,
   Held in the royal chamber, my good kinsman
   Commands the guard, and will not bar our way.

Ethw.
   May I depend on this?

Ong.
   You may, my lord.

Ethw.
   Thanks to thee, Ongar! this is noble service,
   And shall be nobly thank'd. There is, good Alwy,
   Another point; hast thou unto the chiefs
   Yet touch'd upon it?

Alwy.
   Yes, and they all agree 'tis most expedient
   That with Elburga's hand, since weaker minds
   Are blindly wedded to the royal line,
   Your right be strengthen'd.

Ethw.
   And this they deem expedient?

Alwy.
   You sigh, my lord; she is, indeed, less gentle—

Ethw.
   Regard it not, it is a passing thought,
   And it will have its sigh, and pass away.

 Turning away for a little space, and then coming forward again.
   What means hast thou devised, that for a term
   Selred and Ethelbert may be remov'd?
   For faithful to the royal line they are,
   And will not swerve: their presence here were dang'rous:
   We must employ them in some distant strife.

Alwy.
   I have devis'd a plan, but for the means
   Brave Ongar here stands pledged. Woggarwolfe,
   Who once before unweetingly has served us,
   Will do the same again.

Ethw.
   How so? 'tis said that since his last affray,
   With the keen torment of his wounds subdu'd,
   On sick bed laid, by the transforming power
   Of artful monks, he has become most saintly.

Alwy.
   Well, but we trust his saintship ne'ertheless
   May still be lur'd to do a sinner's work.
   To burn the castle of a hateful heretic
   Will make amends for all his bloody deeds:
   You catch the plan: nay, Hexulf and his priests
   Will be our helpmates here. Smile not; good Ongar
   Has pledged his word for this.

Ethw.
   And I will trust to it. This will, indeed,
   Draw off the Thanes in haste. But who is near?
   Skulking behind yon thicket stands a man:
   Seest thou?


 Pointing off the stage.
Alwy.
   Go to him, Ongar, scan him well,
   And if his face betrays a list'ner's guilt—
   Thou hast thy dagger there?

Ong.
   Yes, trust me well.

Ethw.
   Nay, Ongar, be not rash in shedding blood!
   Let not one drop be spilt that may be spar'd.
   Secure him if he wear a list'ner's face:
   We are too strong for stern and ruthless caution.

 Exit Ongar.
   I'm glad he is withdrawn a little space,
   Ere we proceed to join the leagued chiefs.
   Hast thou agreed with Cuthbert? Is he sure?

Alwy.
   Sure. 'Tis agreed when next the ethling hunts,
   To lead him in the feigned quest of game
   From his attendants; there, in ambush laid,
   Cuthbert and his adherents seize upon him,
   And will conduct him with the ev'ning's close
   To Arrick's rugged tower. All is prepar'd.

Ethw.
   But hast thou charged him well that this be done
   With all becoming care and gentleness,
   That nothing may his noble nature gall
   More than the hard necessity compels?

Alwy.
   Do not mistrust us so! your brow is dark:
   At Edward's name your changing countenance
   Is ever clouded.

 Ethw . turns from him agitated.
   You are disturb'd, my lord.

Ethw.
                                            I am disturb'd.

 Turning round and grasping Alwy by the hand. 
   I'll tell thee, Alwy—yes, I am disturb'd—
   No gleam of glory through my prospect breaks,
   But still his image, 'thwart the brightness cast,
   Shades it to night.

Alwy.
   It will be always so: but wherefore should it?
   Glory is ever bought by those who earn it
   With loss of many lives most dear and precious.
   So is it destin'd. Let that be to him
   Which in the crowded breach or busy field
   All meet regardless from a foeman's hand.
   Do the still chamber, and the muflled tread,


 
   And th' unseen stroke that doth th' infliction deal,
   Alter its nature?

Ethw.

 pushing Alwy away from him vehemently, and putting up both his hands to his head .
   Forbear! forbear! I shut mine eyes, mine ears;
   All entrance bar that may into my mind
   Th' abhorred thing convey. Have I not said,
   Thou shalt not dare in word, in look, in gesture,
   In slightest indication of a thought,
   Hold with my mind such base communication?
   By my sword's strength! did I not surely think
   From this bold seizure of the sovereign pow'r,
   A pow'r for which I must full dearly pay,
   So says the destiny that o'er me hangs,
   To shield his weakness and restore again
   In room of Mercia's crown a nobler sway,
   Won by my sword, I would as lief—Northumberland
   Invites my arms, and soon will be subdu'd;
   Of this full sure, a good amends may be
   To noble Edward made.

Alwy

 who during the last part of Ethwald 's speech has been smiling behind his back malignantly .
   O yes, full surely:
   And wand'ring harpers shall in hall and bower
   Sing of the marv'llous deed.

Ethw.

 turning short upon him, and perceiving his smile .
                                            Thou smil'st methinks.
   Full well I read the meaning of that look:
   'Tis a fiend's smile, and it will prove a false one.
 Turning away angrily, whilst Alwy walks to the bottom of the stage.

 Aside, looking suspiciously after him. 

   Have I offended him? he is an agent
   Most needful to me.

 Aloud, advancing to him. 
   Good Alwy, anxious minds will often chide—

 Aside, stopping short. 
   He hears me not, or is it but a feint?

Alwy

 looking off the stage .
   Your arrow-boy returns.

Ethw.

 aside, nodding to himself .
   No, 'tis a free and unoffended voice;
   I'm wrong. This is a bird whose fleshed beak
   The prey too strongly scents to fly away:
   I'll spare my courtesies.
 Aloud. 
What sayst thou, Alwy?

Alwy

 pointing .
   Your arrow-boy.

Ethw.
   I'm glad he is return'd.


Re-enter Boy.
Boy.
   Nowhere, my lord, can I the arrow find.

Ethw.
   Well, boy, it matters not; let us move on.


 Exeunt.
SCENE V.
A narrow gallery in an abbey or cloister, with several doors opening into it. Enter Hexulf and Ongar and two monks.
Hex.
   Fear not, brave Ongar, we, upon thy hint,
   Will quickly act; for here our eager wishes
   Are with the church's good most closely join'd.

 st monk.
   This is the time when he should walk abroad.

 Listening. 
   I hear him at his door.

Hex.
                                            Leave us, good Ongar.

Ong.
   To your good skill I do commit it then;
   Having but only you, most rev'rend father,
   To take my part against this wizard Thane.

 st monk

 still listening .
   Begone, he issues forth.


 Exit Ongar .

 One of the doors opens slowly, and enters Woggarwolfe , wrapped in a cloak, and his head bound.
Hex.
   Good morrow, valiant Thane, whose pious gifts
   Have won heav'n's grace to renovate thy strength,
   And grant thee longer life, how goes thy health?

Wog.
   I thank you, rev'rend father, greatly mended.

 st monk.
   The prayers of holy men have power to save,
   E'en on the very borders of the tomb,
   The humbled soul who doth with gifts enrich
   The holy church.

 d monk.
   Didst thou not feel within thee
   A peaceful calm, a cheering confidence,
   Soon as thy pious offering was accepted?

Wog.

 hesitating .
   Yes, rev'rend fathers,—I have
   thought indeed—
   Perhaps you meant it so—that since that time
   The devil has not scar'd me in my dreams
   So oft as he was wont, when sore with wounds
   I first was laid upon my bed of pain.

Hex.
   Ay, that is much; but noble Woggarwolfe,
   Thinkest thou not the church doth merit well
   Some stable gift, some fix'd inheritance?
   Thou hast those lands that are so nearly join'd
   Unto Saint Alban's abbey.

Wog.

 much surprised .
   My lands! give up my lands?

 st monk.
   What are thy lands
   Compar'd to that which they will purchase for thee?

 d monk.
   To lay thy coffin'd body in the ground,
   Rob'd in the garb of holy men, and bless'd?

 st monk.
   To have thy tomb beneath the shading arch
   Of sacred roof, where nought profane may enter;
   While midnight spirits stand and yell without,
   But o'er the sacred threshold dare not trespass.

Wog.

 with a rueful countenance .
   What, do you think I shall be dead so soon?

Hex.
   Life is uncertain; but how glorious, Thane,
   To look beyond this wicked world of strife,


 
   And for thyself a lofty seat provide
   With saints and holy men, and angel bands!

Wog.
   Nay, father, I am not so highly bent;
   Do but secure me from the horrid fangs
   Of the terrific fiend: I am not proud,
   That will suffice me.

Hex.
   Nay, herein thy humility we praise not,
   And much I fear, at such a humble pitch,
   He who so lately scar'd thee in thy dreams
   May reach thee still.

 st monk.
                                            O think of this!

Hex.
   Dreadful it is, thou knowst,
   To see him in thy dreams; but when awake,
   Naked, and all uncloth'd of flesh and blood,
   As thou at last must be; how wilt thou bear
   To see him yelling o'er thee as his prey;
   Bearing aloft his dark and hideous form;
   Grinding his horrid jaws and darting on thee
   His eyes of vivid fire?

 The monks sign themselves with great marks of fear, and Woggarwolfe looks terrified.
                                            Ah! thinkst thou, Thane,
   That many gifts, ay, half of all thou'rt worth,
   Would dearly purchase safety from such terrors?

Wog.

 in a quick perturbed voice .
   I have the
   plunder of two neighb'ring chiefs,
   Whom I surprised within their towers and slew;
   I'll give you all—if that suffices not,
   I'll fall upon a third, ay, though it were
   My next of kin, nor spare of all his goods
   One fragment for myself. O, holy fathers!
   I humbly crave saintly protection of you.

Hex.
   Nay, Woggarwolfe, on shrines of holy saints
   No gift ere works with efficacious power
   By force and violence gain'd; unless, indeed,
   It be the spoil of some unsaintly Thane,
   Some faithless wizard or foul heretic.
   Thou hast a neighbour, impious Ethelbert;
   His towers to burn and consecrate his spoils,
   O'er all thy sins would cast a sacred robe,
   On which nor fiend nor devil durst fix a fang.
   But now thou lackest strength for such a work,
   And mayst be dead ere thou hast time to do it:
   Therefore I counsel thee, give up thy lands.

Wog.
   O, no! I'm strong enough: my men are strong.
   Give us your rev'rend blessing o'er our heads,
   And we'll set out forthwith.

Hex.
   Then nothing doubt that on your worthy zeal
   Will fall the blessing. Let us onward move.
   Where are thy followers?


 Exeunt : Hex . talking busily to Wog ., and the monks smiling to one another as they go out.
SCENE VI.
The royal apartment: the King is discovered with Hexulf , the seneschal, and several friends or councillors, seated round a council table.
King

 as if continuing to speak .
   It may be so: youth finds no obstacle,
   But I am old.
   Full many a storm on this grey head has beaten;
   And now, on my high station do I stand,
   Like the tired watchman in his air-rock'd tower,
   Who looketh for the hour of his release.
   I'm sick of worldly broils, and fain would rest
   With those who war no more. One gleam of light
   Did sweetly cheer the ev'ning of my day:
   Edward, my son! he was the kindliest prop
   That age did ever rest on—he is gone,
   What should I fight for now?

Sen.
   For thine own honour, for the weal of Mercia,
   With weapons in our hands, and strong in men,
   Who to the royal standard soon will flock,
   If summon'd by thy firm and gen'ral orders.
   Shall these men be our masters? Heaven forefend!
   Five thousand warriors might disperse the foe,
   Even with that devil Ethwald at their head;
   And shall we think of granting to those rebels
   Their insolent demands?

King.
   Good seneschal, if that you think our strength
   Permits us still in open field to strive
   With hope of good, I am not yet so old
   But I can brace these stiffen'd limbs in iron,
   And do a soldier's service.

 To  d coun. 
   Thane of Mordath,
   Thy visage light'neth not upon these hopes;
   What are thy thoughts?

 d coun.
   E'en that these hopes will bring us to a state
   Reft of all hope.
   The rebel chiefs but seek their own enrichment,
   Not Ethwald's exaltation, good my lord;
   Bribe them, and treat for peace. Lack you the means?
   The church, for whose enriching you have rais'd
   This storm, can well supply it; and most surely
   Will do it cheerfully.


 Turning to Hexulf .
Hex.
   No, by the holy mass! that were to bring
   The curse of heav'n upon our impious heads.
   To spoil the holy church is sacrilege:
   And to advise such spoil in any wise
   Is sacrilegious and abominable.

 st coun.
   I am as faithful to the holy church
   As thou art, angry priest. I do defy thee—

Sen.
   What, have ye no respect unto the king?
   I do command you, peace. Who now intrudes?



 

Enter a Servant in great terror.
Serv.
   The rebel force! the castle is surprised!
   They are at hand—they have o'erpower'd the guard.

 d coun.
   Pray God thou liest! I think it cannot be.


 They all rise up alarmed.
Serv.
   It is as true as I do tread this spot.


Enter a Soldier wounded.
King to sol..
   Ha! what sayst thou? thou bearest for thy words
   A rueful witness.

Sol.
   Take arms, and save the king, if it be possible.
   The rebel chieftains have the gate surprised,
   And gain'd, below, the entrance of this tower.
   They struggled for the pass; sharp was the broil;
   This speaks for me, that I have borne my part.


 Falls down exhausted.
Hex.

 to King .
   Retire, my lord, into the higher chamber.
   Your arm can give but small assistance here.
   Until this horrid visit be o'erpast,
   You may conceal yourself.

King.
   No, father, never shall the king of Mercia
   Be, from his hiding-place, like a mean man
   Pull'd forth. But, noble friends, it seems not wise
   That this necessity should reach to you.
   These rebels seek my life, and with that life
   They will be satisfied. In my defence,
   Thus taken as we are, all stand were useless;
   Therefore, if now you will obey your king,
   His last command, retire and save your lives
   For some more useful end. Finding me here,
   They will no farther search: retire, my friends.

 d coun.
   What, leave our king to face his foes alone!

King.
   No, not alone; my friend, the seneschal,
   Will stay with me. We have been young together,
   And the same storms in our rough day of life
   Have beat upon us: be it now God's will,
   We will lay down our aged heads together
   In the still rest, and bid good night to strife.
   Have I said well, my friend?


 Holding out his hand to the seneschal.
Sen.

 kissing his hand with great warmth, and putting one knee to the ground .
   O my lov'd master! many a bounteous favour
   Has shower'd upon me from your royal hand,
   But ne'er before was I so proudly honour'd.

 Rising up with assumed grace.
   Retire, young men, for now I must be proud;
   Retire, your master will confront the foe
   As may become a king.

 All calling out at once. 
   No, no! we will not leave him.


 They all range themselves, drawing their swords, round the King, and the old seneschal stands, by pre-eminence, close to his master's side.
 d coun.
   Here is a wall through which they first must force
   A bloody way, ere on his royal head
   One silver hair be scath'd.


Enter Ethwald, Alwy , and the Conspirators.
Alwy.
   Now vengeance for injustice and oppression!

 d coun.
   On your own heads, then, be it, miscreant chiefs!


 They fight round the King; his party defend him bravely, till many more conspirators enter, and it is overpowered.
Ethw.

 aside, angrily, to Alwy , on still seeing the King, standing in the midst, unhurt, and with great dignity, the seneschal by his side, and no one offering to attack him .
   Hast thou forgot? Where are thy chosen men?
   Is there no hand to do the needful work?
   This is but children's play.

 To some of his party. 
   Come, let us search, that in the neighb'ring chamber
   No lurking foe escape.


 Exit with some followers.
Alwy

 giving a sign to his followers, and going up insolently to the King .
   Oswal, resign thy sword.

Sen.
   First take thou mine, thou base, ignoble traitor!


Giving Alwy a blow with his sword; upon which Alwy and his followers fall upon the King and the seneschal, and surrounding them on every side, kill them, with many wounds, the crowd gathering so close round them, that their fall cannot be seen.

Re-enter Ethwald , and the crowd opening on each side shows the dead bodies of the King and the Seneschal.
Ethw.

 affecting surprise .
   What sight is this?
   Ah! ye have gone too far. Who did this deed?

Alwy.
   My followers, much enraged at slight offence,
   Did fall upon him.

Ethw.
   All have their end decreed, and this, alas!
   Has been his fated hour.
   Come, chiefs and valiant friends, why stand we here
   Looking on that which cannot be repair'd?
   All honour shall be paid unto the dead.
   And, were this deed of any single hand
   The willing crime, he should have vengeance too
   But let us now our task of night fulfil:
   Much have we still to do ere morning dawn.


 Exeunt Ethw . and followers, and the scene closes.


 
SCENE VII.
A royal apartment: Enter Elburga , with her hair scattered upon her shoulders, and with the action of one in violent grief, followed by Dwina , who seems to be soothing her.
Elb.
   Cease, cease! thy foolish kindness soothes me not;
   My morning is o'ercast; my glory sunk;
   Leave me alone to wring my hands and weep.

Dwi.
   O no, my princely mistress! grieve not thus!
   Over our heads the blackest clouds do pass
   And brighter follow them.

Elb.
   No, no, my sky is night! I was a princess,
   Almost a queen: in gorgeous pomp beheld,
   The public gaze was ever turn'd on me;
   Proud was the highest Thane or haughtiest dame
   To do my bidding, ev'ry count'nance watch'd
   Each changeful glance of my commanding eye,
   To read its meaning: now my state is chang'd:
   Scoffing and insult and degrading pity
   Abide the daughter of a murder'd king.
   Heaven's vengeance light upon them all! Begone!
   I hate the very light for looking on me!
   Begone! and soothe me not!

Dwi.
   Forgive me, princess; do not thus despair;
   King Oswal's daughter many friends will find.

Elb.
   Friends! hold thy peace!—Oh it doth rend my heart!
   I have been wont to talk of subjects, vassals,
   Dependants, servants, slaves, but not of friends.
   Where shall I hide my head?

Dwi.
   Surely, dear mistress, with Saint Cuthbert's nuns,
   Whose convent by your father's gifts is rich,
   You will protection find. There quiet rest,
   And holy converse of those pious maids,
   After a while will pour into your mind
   Soft consolation.


 Putting her hands on Elburga 's soothingly.
Elb.

 pushing her away .
   Out upon thee, fool!
   Go, speak thy comforts
   To spirits tame and abject as thyself:
   They make me mad; they make me thus to tear
   My scatter'd locks and strew them to the winds.
 Tearing her hair distractedly.

Enter a Servant.


 To ser. 
   What brings thee here?

Ser.
   Ethwald, the king, is at the gate, and asks
   To be admitted to your presence, princess.

Elb.

 becoming suddenly calm .
   What, Ethwald, sayst thou? sayst thou truly so?

Ser.
   Yes, truly, princess.

Elb.
   Ethwald, that Thane whom thou dost call the king?

Ser.
   Yes, he whom all the states and chiefs of Mercia
   Do call the king.

Elb.
   He enters not. Tell him I am unwell,
   And will not be disturb'd.

 Exit ser.
   What seeks he here? Fie, poorly fainting soul!
   Rouse! rouse thee up! To all the world beside
   Subdued and humbled would I rather be
   Than in the eyes of this proud man.


Re-enter Servant.
                                            What sayst thou?
   Is he departed?

Ser.
   No, he will not depart, but bids me say
   The entrance he has begg'd he now commands.
   I hear his steps behind me.


Enter Ethwald. Elburga turns away from him proudly.
Ethw.
   Elburga, turn and look upon a friend.

Elb.

 turning round haughtily, and looking on him with an assumed expression of anger and scornful contempt .
   Usurping rebel, who hast slain thy master;
   Take thou a look that well beseems thy worth,
   And hie thee hence, false traitor!

Ethw.
   Yes, I will hie me hence, and with me lead
   A fair and beauteous subject to my will;
   That will which may not be gainsaid. For now
   High heaven, that hath decreed thy father's fall,
   Hath also me appointed king of Mercia,
   With right as fair as his: which I'll maintain
   And by the proudest in this lordly realm
   Will be obey'd, even by thy lofty self.

Elb.
   Put shackles on my limbs and o'er my head
   Let your barr'd dungeons low'r; then mayst thou say,
   “Walk not abroad,” and so it needs must be:
   But thinkst thou to subdue, bold as thou art,
   The lofty spirit of king Oswal's daughter?
   Go, bind the wild winds in thy hollow shield,
   And bid them rage no more: they will obey thee.

Ethw.
   Yes, proud Elburga, I will shackle thee.
   But on the throne of Mercia shalt thou sit,
   Not in the dungeon's gloom.
   Ay, and albeit the wild winds refuse
   To be subjected to my royal will,
   The lofty spirit of king Oswal's daughter
   I will subdue.


 Taking her hand. 
Elb.

 throwing him off from her vehemently .
   Off with those bloody hands that slew my father!
   Thy touch is horrid to me! 'tis a fiend's grasp:
   Out from my presence! bloody Thane of Mairnieth!

Ethw.
   Ay! frown on me, Elburga; proudly frown:


 
   I knew thy haughty spirit, and I lov'd it,
   Even when I saw thee first in gorgeous state;
   When, bearing high thy stately form, thou stoodst
   Like a proud queen, and on the gazing crowd,
   Somewhat offended with a late neglect,
   Darted thy looks of anger and disdain.
   High Thanes and dames shrank from thine eye, whilst I,
   Like one who from the mountain's summit sees,
   Beneath him far the harmless lightning play,
   With smiling admiration mark'd thee well,
   And own'd a kindred soul. Each angry flash
   Of thy dark eye was loveliness to me.
   But know, proud maid, my spirit outmasters thine,
   And heedeth not the anger nor the power
   Of living thing.

Elb.
                                            Bold and amazing man!

Ethw.
   And bold should be the man who weds Elburga.

Elb.
   Away! it cannot be, it shall not be!
   My soul doth rise against thee, bloody chief,
   And bids thy power defiance.

Ethw.
   Then art thou mine in truth, for never yet
   Did hostile thing confront me unsubdued;
   Defy me and thou'rt conquer'd.

Elb.
   Thou most audacious chief! it shall not be.

Ethw.
   It shall, it must be, maiden, I have sworn it;
   And here repeat it on that beauteous hand
   Which to no power but with my life I'll yield

 Grasping her hand firmly, which she struggles to free.
   Frown not, Elburga! 'tis in vain to strive;
   My spirit outmasters thine.

Elb.
   Sayst thou to me thou didst not slay my father?
   Sayst thou those hands are guiltless of his death?

Ethw.
   Thinkst thou I'll plead, and say I have not slain
   A weak old man, whose inoffensive mind,
   And strong desire to quit the warring world
   For quiet religious rest, could be, in truth,
   No hindrance to my greatness? were this fitting
   In Mercia's king, and proud Elburga's lord?

Elb.

 turning away .
   Elburga's lord? Thou art presumptuous, prince:
   Go hence, and brave me not.

Ethw.
   I will go hence forthwith; and, by my side,
   The fair selected partner of my throne
   I'll lead, where the assembled chiefs of Mercia
   Wait to receive from me their future queen.

Elb.
   Distract me not!

Ethw.
                                            Resistance is distraction.
   Who ever yet my fixed purpose cross'd?
   Did Ethwald ever yield? Come, queen of Mercia!
   This firm grasp shall conduct thee to a throne:

 Taking her hand, which she feebly resists.
   Come forth, the frowning, haughty bride of Ethwald.

Elb.
   Wonderful man!
   If hell or fortune fight for thee I know not,
   Nothing withstands thy power.


 Exeunt : Ethw . leading off Elb . in triumph, and Dwina following, with her hands and eyes raised to heaven in astonishment.
ACT V. SCENE I.
An arched passage from a gateway in the royal castle. The sound of warlike music without. Enter Ethelbert and Selred with their followers, as if just come from a long march: enter, by the opposite side , Alwy , upon which they halt, the foremost of the followers but just appearing under the gateway.
Alwy.
   Welcome, most valiant chieftains! Fame reports
   That crown'd with full success ye are return'd.

Eth.
   Good sooth, we boast but little of our arms;
   Though Woggarwolfe, our base ignoble spoiler,
   Wounded and sorely shent, we've left behind,
   Again in cloister'd walls with ghostly men,
   Winding his soul, with many a heavy groan,
   Into a saintly frame! God speed the work!
   We are but just in time to save our halls.

Sel.
   It is a shame that such a ruffian thief
   Should thus employ the arms of warlike Thanes.

Alwy.
   In truth it is, but now there reigns in Mercia
   A warlike king, who better knows to deal
   With valiant men. The messenger inform'd you?

Sel.
   He did; yet, be it own'd, to call him king
   Sounds strangely in our ears. How died king Oswal?

Eth.

 to Sel .
   Patience, my friend! good time will show thee all.
   Yet pray inform us, Alwy, ere we part,
   Where is young Edward? in these late commotions
   What part had he?

Alwy.
   Would to the holy saints I could inform you!
   Reports there are, incongruous and absurd—
   Some say, in hunting from his followers stray'd,
   Passing at dusk of eve a high-swoln stream,
   Therein he perish'd; others do maintain
   That, loathing greatness, he conceals himself
   In some lone cave: but as I bear a heart
   True to King Ethwald and the public weal,
   I know of him no more.

Sel.
                                            Thou liest!

Eth.

 pulling back Sel .
   Peace, art thou mad?

Alwy

 pretending not to hear .
   What said brave Selred?

Eth.
   A hasty exclamation of no meaning.



 
Alwy.
   I must away, and bear the welcome tidings
   Of your arrival to the royal ear.

Eth.
   But stop, before thou goest I fain would know
   How fared Elburga in the passing storm?
   Where has she refuge found?

Alwy.
   Within these walls; she is the queen of Mercia.

Eth.
   I am indebted to thee.


 Exit Alwy .
Sel.

 staring with surprise upon Ethelbert .
   What dost thou think of this? Did we hear truly?
   To the usurper of her father's crown,
   And, if our fears be true, his murd'rer too!
   To him! O most unnatural!

Eth.
   Ay, so it is. As one, who ventures forth
   After an earthquake's awful visitation,
   The country round in strange unwonted guise
   Beholds; here swelling heights and herby knolls,
   Where smok'd the cottage and the white flocks browz'd,
   Sunk into turbid pools; there rifted rocks,
   With all their shaggy woods upon their sides,
   In the low bosom of the flowery vale
   Resting uncouthly—even so does he,
   Who looks abroad after the storms of state,
   Strange changes see; unnatural and strange.

Sel.
   It makes my spirit boil—the gentle Edward!
   So gently brave!

Eth.
                                            Yes, there is cause of grief
   And indignation too: but Ethwald reigns,
   Howe'er he gain'd his height, and he possesses
   The qualities that suit his lofty station.
   With them I fear he has his passions also,
   Hostile to public good: be it our part
   To use the influence we still retain
   O'er his ambitious mind for Mercia's weal!
   This is our duty now.

Sel.
                                            I'll take thy counsel.

 To the soldiers. 
   Follow, weary comrades.


 Exeunt Eth . and Sel . and their followers, marching across the stage.
SCENE II.
A royal apartment. Elburga , as queen, discovered sitting on a chair of state, with Dwina , ladies, and officers of state attending.
Elb.
   We've waited long: how goes the day?
   knowst thou?


 To  st officer. 
 st off.
   As comes the light across this arched roof
   From those high windows, it should wear, methinks,
   Upon noon-day.

Elb.
   And the procession to the royal chapel
   Should at this hour begin. The king, perchance,
   Is with affairs detain'd: go thou and see.

 Exit  st officer.
   I am impatient now.

 Voice heard without.
   What voice is that?


First SONG without.
   Hark! the cock crows, and the wind blows,
      Away, my love, away!
   Quick, don thy weeds and tell thy beads,
      For soon it will be day.

 st lady.
   'Tis sadly wild.

Dwi.
   'Tis sad, but wondrous sweet.
   Who may it be? List, list! she sings again.


Second SONG without.
   Where layst thou thy careless head?
   On the cold heath is my bed,
   Where the moor-cock shuts his wing,
   And the brown snake weaves his ring.
   Safe and fearless will I be,
   The coiled adder stings not me.

Elb.

 rising, displeased, from her seat .
   Call those who wait without. What may this mean?


Enter an Attendant.
   Whose voice is that which in a day of joy
   Such plaintive music makes?

Atten.
   Pardon, my royal dame! be not offended!
   'Tis a poor maid bereaved of her mind.
   Rent are her robes, her scatter'd locks unbound,
   Like one who long through rugged ways hath stray'd,
   Beat with the surly blast; but never yet,
   Though all so sorely shent, did I behold
   A fairer maid. She aims at no despite:
   She's wild, but gentle.

Dwi.
   O hark again!


Third SONG without.

    Once upon my cheek
      He said the roses grew,
   But now they're wash'd away
      With the cold ev'ning dew.

   For I wander through the night,
      When all but me take rest,
   And the moon's soft beams fall piteously
      Upon my troubled breast.

 A pause.


Fourth SONG.
   Ah, maiden! bear the biting smart,
      Nor thus thy loss deplore;
   The Thane's fair daughter has his heart,
      He will return no more.



 
 st lady.
   'Tis strangely melancholy.

Dwi.
   'Tis like the mournful sounds which oftentimes
   The midnight watcher, in his lonely tower,
   Hears with the wailing blast most sweetly mingled.

Elb.

 to attendant .
   Go thou and lead her hither.

Atten.
   I will, great queen.—But here she comes unbidden.


Enter Bertha , with a wild unsettled air, and her hair scattered upon her shoulders. The ladies gather about her with curiosity.
 st lady.
   How fair she is!

 d lady.
                                            Her eyes of lovely blue,
   Gentle, but restless. Dost thou see that glance?

 To  st lady.
   I fear to look upon her.

Dwi.
   Fie, fie upon it! press not near her thus;
   She seems offended: I will speak to her.

 To Berth .
   Sweet lady, art thou sad?

 Bertha looks steadfastly at her, then drops her head upon her breast, and makes no answer.
   We would be kind to thee.


 Berth . then looks more gently on her, but is still silent.
 st lady.
   Dost thou not speak, thou who canst sing so well?

Dwi.
   Who taught thee those sweet notes?

Berth.
   The night was dark: I met spirits on my way:
   They sang me sweet songs, but they were sorrowful.

Dwi.
   Ah, woe is me! and dost thou wander then,
   In the dark night alone, no one to tend thee?

Berth.
   When the moon's dark, I follow the night-bird's cry,
   And it doth guide my way.—But he'll return,
   So do they tell me, when sweet violets blow,
   And summer comes again.

Dwi.
                                            And who is he?

Berth.
   List, and the winds will tell thee as they pass:
   The stilly air will whisper it. But softly,
   Tell it to none again. They must not know
   How stern he is, for he was gentle once.

Dwi.
   A cruel heart had he who could forsake thee!

Ber.

 putting her hand eagerly on Dwina 's mouth .
   Hush, hush! we'll not offend him. He is great,
   And must not be offended.

Elb.

 coming near her .
   What, sayst thou he is great?
   Rent are thy weeds, and thin thy ruffled robe:
   Why didst thou leave thy home thus unprotected?

Ber.

 turning hastily upon her .
   I saw his banner
   streaming in the air,
   And I did follow it.

Elb.
   His banner in the air! What is thy love?

Berth.

 looking fiercely at her .
   They say he is a king.

Elb.

 smiling .
   Poor maid! 'tis ever thus with such as she;
   They still believe themselves of some high state,
   And mimic greatness.

Berth.
   Thou art a fair dame and a gay—but go;
   Take off thine eyes from me; I love thee not.

 Shrinks from Elburga , walking backwards, and looking frowningly at her; then beckoning to Dwina , she speaks in her ear.
   They say a royal dame has won his faith,
   Stately and proud. But in a gloomy dream
   I heard it first, confused and terrible:
   And oftimes, since, the fiend of night repeats it,
   As on my pressed breast he sits and groans.
   I'll not believe it.

Dwi.
                                            What is thy name, sweet lady?

Berth.

 rubbing her hand across her forehead as if trying to recollect .
   I had a name that kind friends call'd me by;
   And with a blessing did the holy man
   Bestow it on me. But I've wander'd far
   Through wood and wilds, and strangely on my head
   The numbing winds have beat, and I have lost it.
   Be not offended with me—
   For, lady, thou art gentle, and I fear thee.


 Bowing submissively to Dwina .

Enter Ethelbert .
Eth.

 to Dwina , after looking at Bertha .
   What maid is that so haggard and so wild?

Dwi.
   A wand'ring maniac, but so fair and gentle
   Thou needs must speak to her.

Eth.

 going up to Bertha .
   Fair lady, wilt thou suffer—gracious heaven!
   What see I here! the sweet and gentle Bertha!
   Ah, has it come to this! Alas, alas!
   Sweet maiden, dost thou know me?

Berth.

 after looking earnestly at him .
   I know thee well enough. They call thee mad;
   Thy wild and raving words oft made the ears
   Of holy men to tingle.

Eth.
   She somewhat glances at the truth. Alas!
   I've seen her gay and blooming as the rose,
   And cheerful, too, as song of early lark,
   I've seen her prattle on her nurse's lap,
   Innocent bud! and now I see her thus.


 Weeps.
Berth.
   Ah! dost thou weep? are they unkind to thee?

 Shaking her head.
   Yes, yes! from out the herd, like a mark'd deer,
   They drive the poor distraught. The storms of heaven
   Beat on him: gaping hinds stare at his woe;
   And no one stops to bid heav'n speed his way.

Eth.

 flourish of trumpets .
   Sweet maid, retire.

Berth.
   Nay, nay! I will not go: there be without
   Those who will frown upon me.

Eth.

 endeavouring to lead her off .
   I pray thee be entreated!


 Dwina takes hold of her also to lead her off, but she breaks from them furiously.


 
Berth.
   Ye shall not force me! Wist ye who I am?
   The whirlwind in its strength contends with me,
   And I o'ermaster it.

Eth.
   Stand round her then, I pray you, gentle ladies!
   The king must not behold her.


 The ladies gather round Bertha , and conceal her.

Enter Ethwald , followed by Thanes and Attendants.
Ethw.

 after returning the obeisance of the assembly .
   This gay and fair attendance on our person,
   And on our queen, most honour'd lords and dames,
   We much regard; and could my heart express—

 Bertha , hearing his voice, shrieks out.
   What cry is that?

Dwi.
   Regard it not: it is a wand'ring maid,
   Distracted in her mind, who is in search,
   As she conceits it, of some faithless lover.
   She sings sweet songs of wildest harmony,
   And at the queen's command we led her in.

Ethw.
   Seeking her love! distracted in her mind!
   Have any of my followers wrong'd her? Speak!
   If so it be, by righteous heaven I swear!
   The man, whoe'er he be, shall dearly rue it.


 Bertha shrieks again, and, breaking through the crowd, runs up to Ethwald . He starts back, and covers his eyes with one hand, whilst she, catching hold of the other, presses it to her breast.
Berth.
   I've found thee now, and let the black fiend growl,
   I will not part with thee. I've follow'd thee
   Through crag and moor and wild. I've heard thy voice
   Sound from the dark hill's side, and follow'd thee.
   I've seen thee on the gath'ring twilight clouds,
   Ride with the stately spirits of the storm.
   But thou lookst sternly on me.
   O be not angry! I will kneel to thee;
   For thou art glorious now, as I am told,
   And must have worship.


 Kneeling, and bowing her head meekly to the ground. 
Ethw.

 turning away .
   O God! O God! Where art thou, Ethelbert?
   Thou mightst have saved me this.


 Looking round, and seeing that Ethelbert weeps, he also becomes softened, and turns to Bertha with great emotion.
Berth.
   They say she's fair and glorious: woe is me!
   I am but form'd as simple maidens are.
   But scorn me not; I have a powerful spell,
   A Druid gave it me, which on mine arm
   When once enclasp'd, will make me fair as she;
   So thou wilt turn to me.

Ethw.
   O Ethelbert! I pray thee pity me!
   This sight doth move me, e'en to agony.
   Remove her hence; but O deal gently with her!


 Ethelbert endeavours again to lead her off, and the ladies crowd about her. She is then carried out, and is heard to scream as they are carrying her.
Ethw.

 in great disorder .
   Come, come away! we do but linger here.


 Elburga , who, since Ethwald 's entering, has remained in the background, but agitated with passions, now advances angrily to him
Elb.
   So thou hast known this maid?

Ethw.
   Fie! speak not to me now.

Elb.
                                            Away, away!
   Thou hast lodg'd softer passions in thy breast
   Than I have reckon'd on.

Ethw.

 shaking her off .
   Fie! turn thy face aside, and shade thine eyes!
   That no soft passion in thy bosom lives,
   Is thy opprobrium, woman, and thy shame.

Elb.
   There are within my breast such thoughts, I trust,
   As suit my lofty state.

Ethw.

 aside to Elb .
   Go, heartless pageant, go,
   Lead on thy senseless show, and move me not
   To do thee some despite.

 Aloud to the ladies. 
                                            Move on, fair dames.

 To Elb ., who seems unwilling to go.
   The king commands it.


 Exeunt Elburga and ladies.
 st off.

 to Ethw ., who stands with his eyes fixed on the ground .
   Please you, my lord, but if you move not also,
   The ceremony will, in sooth, appear
   As marr'd and cut in twain.

Ethw.
   What sayst thou, marshal?

 st off.
   Please you, my lord, to move?

Ethw.
   Ay, thou sayst well: in the soul's agony
   A meaner man might turn aside and weep.


 Exit Ethw . with part of his train, the others ranging themselves in order to follow him. A great confusion and noise is then heard without, and a voice calling out “The king is wounded.” The crowd press back again in disorder, and presently re-enter Ethw . supported.
 st off.
   My lord, how is it with you?

Ethw.
   I fear but ill, my friend. Where is the man
   That gave me this fell stroke?

 st off.
   I cannot tell: they have surrounded him.


Enter  d Officer.
 d off.
   He is secured.

Ethw.
   Is it a Mercian hand?

 d off.
   It is, my lord, but of no high degree.
   It is the frantic stroke of a poor groom,
   Who did his late lord love; and, for that crime,
   Last night, with wife and children weeping round him,


 
   Was by your soldiers turn'd into the cold,
   Houseless and bare.

Ethw.
                                            Curse on their ruffian zeal!
   Torment him not, but let him die in peace.
   Would I might say—. I'm very faint, my friends:
   Support me hence, I pray you!


 Exeunt , Ethw . supported.
SCENE III.
A royal apartment: an open door in front, showing an inner chamber, in which is discovered Ethwald lying upon a couch, and surrounded with the Thanes and Officers of his court , Selred and Ethelbert standing on each side of him.
Sel.

 after Ethw . has said something to him in a low voice .
   He is too much inclosed and longs for air:
   He'll breathe more freely in the outer chamber,
   Let us remove him.


 They lift him in his couch, and bring him forward to the front of the stage.
 st off.
   How are you now, my lord?

Ethw.
   Somewhat exhausted: and albeit, good Thanes,
   I greatly am indebted to your love,
   For a short space I fain would be alone.

 st off.
   Farewell! God send your highness rest! meantime
   We'll pray for your recovery.

 d off.
   And heaven will hear our prayers.

Omnes.
   Amen, amen!

Ethw.
   Pray heaven to order all things for the weal
   Of my good realm, and I shall be well pleased
   To live or die. Adieu!

 Exeunt all but Ethw., Selred , and Ethelbert . After a pause, in which Ethw . seems agitated and uneasy.
   My dearest Selred, think it not unkind,
   But go thou too.
 Exit Selred .

 Raising himself on the couch, and taking both the hands of Ethelbert , which he presses in his, looking up in his face expressively for some time before he speaks.

   I am oppress'd. To them, even in this state,
   I still must be a king: to you, my friend,
   Let me put off all seeming and constraint,
   And be a poor weak man.
 A pause. 
Thou speakest not,
   Thy face is sad and solemn. Well I see
   Thou lookst upon me as a dying wretch—
   There is no hope.

Eth.
                                            Much will it profit thee
   To be prepared as though there were no hope;
   For if thou liv'st thou'lt live a better man,
   And if thou diest, may heav'n accept it of thee!

Ethw.
   O that it would! But, my good Ethelbert,
   To be thus seized in my high career,
   With all my views of glory op'ning round me—
   The Western state e'en now invites mine arms.
   And half Northumberland, in little time,
   Had been to Mercia join'd.

Eth.
   Nay, think not now, I pray thee, of these matters!
   They mix uncouthly with the pious thoughts
   That do become your state.

Ethw.
                                            I know it well;
   But they do press so closely on my heart—
   O I did think to be remember'd long!
   Like those grand visitations of the earth,
   That on its alter'd face for ages leave
   The traces of their might. Alas, alas!
   I am a powerful, but a passing storm,
   That soon shall be forgotten!

Eth.
   I do beseech thee think of better things!

Ethw.
   Thou seest I weep.—Before thee I may weep.

 Dropping his head upon his breast, and groaning deeply.
   Long have I toil'd and stain'd my hands in blood
   To gain pre-eminence; and now, alas!
   Newly arrived at this towering height,
   With all my schemes of glory rip'ning round me,
   I close mine eyes in darkness, and am nothing.

Eth.
   What, nothing sayst thou?

Ethw.
                                            O no, Ethelbert!
   I look beyond this world, and look with dread,
   Where all for me is fearful and unknown.
   Death I have daily braved in fields of fight,
   And, when a boy, oft on the air-hung bough
   I've fearless trod, beneath me roaring far
   The deep swoln floods, with every erring step
   Instant destruction. Had I perish'd then—
   Would that I had, since it is come to this!


 Raising up his hands vehemently to heaven.
Eth.
   Be not so vehement: this will endanger
   The little chance thou still mayst have for life.
   The God we fear is merciful.

Ethw.
   Ay, He is merciful; but may it reach—
   O listen to me!—Oswal I have murder'd,
   And Edward, brave and gentle—ay, this bites
   With a fell tooth!—I vilely have enthrall'd;
   Of all his rights deprived. The loving Bertha:
   Too well thou knowst what I have been to her—
   Ah! thinkest thou a thousand robed priests
   Can pray down mercy on a soul so foul?

Eth.
   The inward sighs of humble penitence
   Rise to the ear of heav'n, when pealed hymns
   Are scatter'd with the sounds of common air;
   If I indeed may speak unto a king
   Of low humility.

Ethw.
   Thy words bite keenly, friend. O king me not!
   Grant me but longer life, and thou shalt see
   What brave amends I'll make for past offences.
   Thou thinkest hardly of me; ne'ertheless,
   Rough as my warrior's life has been, good thoughts
   Have sometimes harbour'd here.

 Putting his hand on his heart.


 
   If I had lived,
   It was my full intent that, in my power,
   My people should have found prosperity:
   I would have proved to them a gen'rous lord.
   If I had lived—Ah! thinkst thou, Ethelbert,
   There is indeed no hope?

Eth.
                                            I may not flatter you.

Ethw.

 holding up his clasped hands .
   Then heaven
   have mercy on a guilty soul!
   Good Ethelbert, full well thou knowst that I
   No coward am: from power of mortal thing
   I never shrank. O might I still contend
   With spear and helm, and shield and brandish'd blade!
   But I must go where spear and helm and shield
   Avail not:
   Where the skill'd warrior, cased in iron, stands
   Defenceless as the poor uncrusted worm.
   Some do conceit that disembodied spirits
   Have in them more capacity of woe
   Than flesh and blood maintain. I feel appall'd:
   Yes, Thane of Sexford, I do say appall'd.
   For, ah! thou knowst not in how short a space
   The soul of man within him may be changed.

Eth.
   I know it all too well. But be more calm;
   Thou hast a task to do, and short perhaps
   May be the time allow'd thee. True repentance
   With reparation of offences past
   Is ever yok'd. Declare it as thy will
   That Edward do succeed unto his rights:
   And for poor Bertha, she shall be my charge;
   I'll tend and cheer her in my quiet home.

Ethw.
   Thou dost prevent my boon: heaven bless thee for it!
   I give thee power to do whate'er thou thinkst
   I living should have done. 'Tis all I can,
   And gracious heaven accept it at my hands!

Eth.
   Amen, my friend! I'll faithfully fulfil
   The important trust—Ha! how thy visage changes!
   Thy mind's exertion has outrun thy strength.
   He faints away. Help! who attends without?


Enter Selred with Attendants.
   Support the king: whether a sudden faint
   Or death be now upon him, trow I not,
   But quickly call the queen.

Sel.
                                            Alas, my brother!


 Assisting Eth . to raise Ethw . 's head.
Eth.
   Raise him gently, Selred.
   For, if that life within him still remain,
   It may revive him.

Sel.
   Ah, see how changed he is! Alas, my brother!
   Pride of my father's house, is this thy end?


Enter Elburga , Nobles, &c.
Elb.
   Let me approach unto my royal lord.
   Good Ethelbert, thou long hast known thy king,
   Look'd he e'er thus before?


 Looking on Ethw .
Eth.
   No, royal dame; and yet 'tis but a faint;
   See, he revives again.

Ethw.

 opening his eyes .
   Who are about me now?

Eth.
   The queen and nobles.

Sel.
   And Selred, too, is here, my dearest Ethwald!

Ethw.

 holding out his hand to Sel .
   Ay, noble
   brother, thou wert ever kind.
   Faintness returns again; stand round, my friends,
   And hear my dying words. It is my will
   That Ethelbert shall, after my decease,
   With the concurrence of the nation's council,
   The kingdom settle as may best appear
   To his experienced wisdom, and retain
   Until that settlement the kingly power.
   Faintness returns again; I say no more.
   Art thou displeas'd, my Selred?

Sel.

 kneeling and kissing his hand .
   No, brother,
   let your dying will bereave me
   E'en of my father's lands, and with my sword
   I will maintain it.

Ethw.
   Thou art a gen'rous brother; fare thee well!

Elb.
   What, is the queen, indeed, so poor a thing
   In Mercia's state that she should be o'erpass'd,
   Unhonour'd and unmention'd?

Ethw.

 to Elb ., waving his hand faintly .
   Be at peace!
   Thou shalt have all things that become thy state.

 To attendants. 
   Lower my head, I pray you.

 st off.
   He faints again.

 d off.
   He will not hold it long:
   The kingdom will be torn with dire contentions.
   And the Northumbrian soon will raise his head.

Ethw.

 raising himself eagerly with great vehemence .
   Northumberland! Oh I did purpose soon,
   With thrice five thousand of my chosen men,
   To have compass'd his proud towers.
   Death, death! thou art at hand, and all is ended!


 Groans, and falls back upon the couch.
 st off.
   This is a faint from which I fear, brave Thanes,
   He will awake no more.

 d off.
   Sayst thou? go nearer and observe the face.

 st off.
   If that mine eyes did ever death behold,
   This is a dead man's visage.

 d off.
   Let us retire. My good lord Ethelbert,
   You shall not find me backward in your service.

 st off.
   Nor me.

Omnes.
                                            Nor any of us.

Eth.
   I thank you, Thanes! 'Tis fit you should retire;
   But Selred and myself, and, of your number,
   Two chosen by yourselves, will watch the body.

 To Dwina , who supports Elburga , and seems soothing her.
   Ay, gentle Dwina, soothe your royal mistress,


 
   And lead her hence.

 After looking steadfastly on the body.
   Think ye, indeed, that death hath dealt his blow?

 st off.
   Ah, yes, my lord! that countenance is death!


 Selred kneels by the body, and hides his head.
Eth.
   Then peace be to his spirit!
   A brave and daring soul is gone to rest.
   Thus powerful death th' ambitious man arrests,
   In midst of all his great and towering hopes,
   With heart high swoln; as the omnipotent frost
   Seizes the rough enchafed northern deep,
   And all its mighty billows, heav'd aloft,
   Boldly commixing with the clouds of heaven,
   Are fix'd to rage no more.


 The curtain drops.
PART SECOND.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Ethwald .

Ethelbert .

Selred .

Edward .

Alwy .

Hereulf .

Hexulf .

Ongar .

Thanes, soldiers, &c. &c

WOMEN Elburga .

Dwina .

Ladies, attendants, &c. &c.


ACT I. SCENE I.
A gloomy apartment in an old Saxon castle, with small grated windows very high from the ground. Edward is discovered, sitting by a table, and tracing figures with chalk upon it, which he frequently rubs out again; at last, throwing away the chalk, he fixes his eyes upon the ground, and continues for some time in a melancholy musing posture. Enters to him the Keeper, carrying something in his hand.
Edw.
   What brings thee now? it surely cannot be
   The time of food: my prison hours are wont
   To fly more heavily.

Keep.
   It is not food: I bring wherewith, my lord,
   To stop a rent in these old walls, that oft
   Hath griev'd me, when I've thought of you o' nights;
   Through it the cold wind visits you.

Edw.
   And let it enter! it shall not be stopp'd.
   Who visits me besides the winds of heaven?
   Who mourns with me but the sad sighing wind?
   Who bringeth to mine ear the mimick'd tones
   Of voices once belov'd, and sounds long past,
   But the light-wing'd and many voiced wind?
   Who fans the prisoner's lean and fever'd cheek,
   As kindly as the monarch's wreathed brows,
   But the free piteous wind?
   I will not have it stopp'd.

Keep.
   My lord, the winter now creeps on apace:
   Hoar frost this morning on our shelter'd fields
   Lay thick, and glanced to the up-risen sun,
   Which scarce had power to melt it.

Edw.
   Glanced to th' up-risen sun! Ay, such fair morns,
   When ev'ry bush doth put its glory on,
   Like to a gemmed bride! Your rustics, now,
   And early hinds, will set their clouted feet
   Through silver webs, so bright and finely wrought
   As royal dames ne'er fashion'd, yet plod on
   Their careless way, unheeding.
   Alas, how many glorious things there be
   To look upon! Wear not the forests, now,
   Their latest coat of richly varied dyes?

Keep.
   Yes, good my lord, the cold chill year advances;
   Therefore, I pray you, let me close that wall.

Edw.
   I tell thee no, man; if the north air bite,
   Bring me a cloak.—Where is thy dog to-day?



 
Keep.
   Indeed I wonder that he came not with me
   As he is wont.

Edw.
   Bring him, I pray thee, when thou com'st again.
   He wags his tail and looks up to my face
   With the assured kindliness of one
   Who has not injur'd me. How goes your sport?

Keep.
   Nobly, my lord; and much it pleases me
   To see your mind again so sooth'd and calm.

Edw.
   I thank thee: knowst thou not that man is form'd
   For varied states; to top the throne of power,
   Or in a toad's hole squat, shut from the light?
   He can bear all things; yet, if thou hast grace,
   Lead me for once into the open air
   To see the woods, and fields, and country round,
   In the fair light of heaven.

Keep.
   I must not do it; I am sworn to this;
   But all indulgence suited to this state
   Of close confinement, gladly will I grant.

Edw.
   A faithful servant to a wicked lord,
   Whoe'er he be, art thou. Is Oswal dead?
   Or does some powerful Thane his power usurp?

 A pause.
   Thou wilt not answer me.


 A horn heard without.
Keep.
   Ha! who is at the gate that sounds so boldly?
   I'll mount this tower and see.

 Exit hastily, and Edward takes his seat again as before. Keep. without, calling down from the tower .
   It is a company of armed men,
   Bearing a royal ensign.

Edw.

 starting from his seat .
   Then let me rise and brace my spirits up!
   They bring me death or freedom!
Re-enter Keeper from the tower.


 Eagerly to him. 
   What thinkst thou of it?

Keep.
   I'll to the gate, and meet them instantly.


 Exit crossing over the stage hastily.
Edw.

 alone .
   An it be death they'll do it speedily,
   And there's the end of all. Ah, liberty!
   An it be thou, enlarger of man's self!—
   My heart doth strangely beat as though it were.
   I hear their steps already: they come quickly:
   Ah! how step they who joyful tidings bear!

Keep.

 calling without to Edw . before they enter .
   My lord, my lord! you're a free man again!

Edw.
   Am I? great God of heaven, how good
   Thou art!


Enter two Thanes, conducted by the Keeper.
Edw.

 accosting them .
   Brave men, ye come upon a blessed errand,
   And let me bless you.

 st Th.
   With joy unto ourselves we bring, my lord,
   Your full enlargement from the highest power,
   That Mercia now obeys.

Edw.
                                            Not from king Oswal?

 d Th.
   No, most noble ethling;
   From the Lord Regent Ethelbert we come.

Edw.
   Mine uncle, then, is dead.

 d Th.
                                            E'en so, my lord.

Edw.
   Ah! good and gentle, and to me most kind!

 Weeps, hiding his face. 
   Died he peacefully?

 st Th.
   He is at peace.

Edw.
                                            Ye are reserv'd with me.
   But ye are wise perhaps; time will declare it.
   Give me your hands; ye are my loving friends.
   And you, good guardian of this castle, too,
   You have not been to me a surly keeper.


 Taking the Thanes warmly by the hand, and afterwards the keeper.  A second horn sounds without very loud.
 st Th.
   Ha! at our heels another messenger
   So quickly sent!


 Exit keep.
 d Th.
                                            What may this mean?

Edw.
   Nay, wait not for him here.
   Let us go forth from these inclosing walls,
   And meet him in the light and open day.

 st Th.
   'Tis one, I hope, sent to confirm our errand:
   How came he on so quickly?

Edw.
   Thou hopest, Thane? Oh! then thou doubtest too.


 Pauses and looks earnestly in their faces.

Enter Ongar , conducted by the keeper.
 st Th.

 to Ongar .
   Thine errand?

Ongar.
   That thou shalt know, and the authority
   Which warrants it. You here are come, grave Thanes,
   Upon the word of a scarce-named regent,
   To set this pris'ner free; but I am come
   With the sign'd will of Ethwald to forbid it;
   And here I do retain him.


 Laying hold of Edw .
 st Th
   Loose thy unhallow'd grasp, thou base deceiver!
   Nor face us out with a most wicked tale.
   We left the king at his extremity,
   And long are this he must have breath'd his last.

Ongar.
   Art thou in league with death to know so well
   When he perforce must come to sick men's beds?
   King Ethwald lives, and will live longer too
   Than traitors wish for. Look upon these orders;
   Knowest thou not his sign?
 Showing his warrant.   Both Thanes, after reading it. 
'Tis wonderful!

Ongar.
   Is it so wonderful
   A wounded man, fainting with loss of blood
   And rack'd with pain, should seem so near his end,
   And yet recover?

 d Th.
                                            Ethwald then lives?



 
Ongar.
   Ay, and long live the king!

Edw.
                                            What words are these?
   I am as one who in a misty dream,
   Listens to things wild and fantastical,
   Which no congruity nor kindred bear
   To preconceiv'd impressions.
   King Ethwald, said ye? and is Ethwald king?

 st Th.
   He did succeed your uncle.

Edw.
   And by his orders am I here detain'd?

 st Th.
   Even so, my lord.

Edw.
   It cannot be.
 Turning to  d Th. 
Thou sayst not so, good Thane?

 d Th.
   I do believe it.

Edw.
   Nay, nay, ye are deceiv'd.

 Turning to Ongar .
   What sayst thou?
   Was I by Ethwald's orders here imprison'd?

Ongar.
   Yes, yes; who else had power or will to do it?

Edw.

 holding his clasped hands .
   Then hope farewell!
   My gleam is dark; my rest is in the dust!
   O that an enemy had done this wrong!
   But Ethwald, thou, who to my heart wert press'd
   As dearest brother never was by him
   Who shar'd his mother's breast! Thou in whose fame
   I gloried—I who spoke not of my own!—
   When shouting crowds proclaim'd thy honour'd name,
   I ever join'd with an ungrudging heart:
   Yea, such true kindred feeling bore I to him,
   E'en at his praise I wept. I pray you, sirs!

 Bursting into tears. 
   This hath o'ercome me.

Ongar to Thanes.
   Why do you tarry here?
   You've seen my warrant.
   Depart with me and leave the prisoner.

 st Th.
   What, shall we leave him in this piteous state,
   Lone and uncomforted?

Ongar.
   It must be so, there is no time to lose.
   Come, follow me; my men are at the gate.


 As they are all about to depart , Edward , starting furiously forward to the door, flies upon Ongar , and seizes him by the throat.
Edw.
   What! leave me here, fiend! Am I not a man,
   Created free to breathe the circling air,
   And range the boundless earth as thy base self,
   Or thy more treach'rous lord? thou tyrant's slave!


 As he struggles with him , Ongar calls loudly, and immediately the apartment is filled with armed men, who separate them.
Ongar

 to his followers .
   Remove that madman to the inner chamber.
   Keeper, attend your duty.

 To the Thanes. 
   Follow me.


 Exeunt Ongar and Thanes, &c.
Keep.

 to Edw ., as some remaining armed men are leading him off by the opposite side .
   Alas! alas! my lord, to see you thus,
   In closer bondage! Pray! good soldiers, pray!
   Let him in this apartment still remain:
   He'll be secure; I'll pledge my life—

Edw.
                                            No, no!
   Let them enchain me in a pitchy gulph!
   'Twere better than this den of weariness,
   Which my soul loathes. What care I now for ease?


 Exeunt , Edw . led off by the men.
SCENE II.
An apartment in the royal castle. Enter Ethelbert meeting with Selred , who enters at the same time from a door at the bottom of the stage.
Eth.
   How didst thou leave the king?

Sel.
   Recovering strength with every passing hour.
   His spirits too, that were so weak and gloomy,
   From frequent fainting and the loss of blood,
   Now buoyant rise, and much assist the cure
   Which all regard as wonderful.

Eth.
   It has deceiv'd us, yet I've heard of such.

Sel.
   Thou lookest sadly on it: how is this?
   With little cost of thought I could explain
   In any man but thee that cloudy brow;
   But well I know thou didst not prize the power
   With which thou wert invested.

Eth.
   Selred, this hasty gloom will prove too short
   To work in Ethwald's mind the change we look'd for.
   And yet he promis'd well.

Sel.
   Ay, and will well perform; mistrust him not.
   I must confess, nature has form'd his mind
   Too restless and aspiring: and of late.
   Having such mighty objects in his grasp,
   He has too reckless been of others' rights.
   But, now that all is gain'd, mistrust him not:
   He'll prove a noble king; a good one too.

Eth.
   Thou art his brother.

Sel.
                                            And thou his friend.

Eth.
   I stand reprov'd before thee.
   A friend, indeed, should gentler thoughts maintain,
   And so I will endeavour.

Sel.
   Give me thy valiant hand; full well I know
   The heart which it pertains to.

Eth.
   I hear him, now, within his chamber stir.

Sel.
   Thou'lt move him best alone. God speed thy zeal!
   I'll stand by thee the while and mark his eye.


 Eth . remains on the front of the stage whilst Ethwald enters behind him from the door at the bottom of the stage, leaning upon an attendant.
Ethw.

 to Sel . as he goes up to Eth .
   How, Ethelbert, our friend, so deep in thought?


 

 To the attendant. 
   Leave me awhile methinks a brother's arm
   Will be a kindlier staff.

 Exit attendant, and he leans upon Sel .
   How, Ethelbert, my friend!
   What vision from the nether world of sprites
   Now rises to thine eyes, thus on the ground
   So fix'd and sternly bent?

Eth.
   Pardon, my lord! my mind should now be turn'd
   To cheerful thoughts, seeing you thus restor'd.
   How fares it with you?

Ethw.
   E'en as with one, on a rude mountain's side,
   Who suddenly in seeming gloom enclos'd
   Of drizzly night, athwart the wearing mist
   Sees the veil'd sun break forth in heav'n's wide arch,
   And showing still a lengthen'd day before him.
   As with a trav'ller in a gloomy path,
   Whose close o'er-shaded end did scare his fancy
   With forms of hidden ill; who, wending on
   With fearful steps, before his eyes beholds
   On the sudden burst a fair and wide expanse
   Of open country, rich in promis'd good.
   As one o'erwhelmed in the battle's shock,
   Who, all oppress'd and number'd with the slain,
   Smother'd and lost, with sudden impulse strengthen'd,
   Shakes the foul load of dead men. from his back,
   And finds himself again standing erect,
   Unmaim'd and vigorous. As one who stood—
   But it may tire thee with such ample scope
   To tell indeed how it doth fare with me.

Eth.
   You truly are from a dark gloom restor'd
   To cheerful day; and, if the passing shade
   Has well impress'd your mind, there lies before you
   A prospect fair indeed. Ay, fairer far
   Than that the gloom obscured.

Ethw.
                                            How sayst thou?

Eth.
   Did not that seeming cloud of death obscure
   To your keen forecast eye tumultuous scenes
   Of war and strife, and conquest yet to come,
   Bought with your people's blood? but now, my Ethwald,
   Your chasten'd mind, so rich in good resolves,
   Hath stretch'd before it future prospect fair,
   Such as a god might please.

Ethw.
   How so, good Ethelbert?

Eth.
   And dost thou not perceive? O see before thee
   Thy native land, freed from the ills of war,
   And hard oppressive power, a land of peace!
   Where yellow fields unspoil'd, and pastures green,
   Mottled with herds and flocks, who crop secure
   Their native herbage, nor have ever known
   A stranger's stall, smile gladly.
   See through its tufted alleys to heav'n's roof
   The curling smoke of quiet dwellings rise:
   Whose humble masters, with forgotten spear
   Hung on the webbed wall, and cheerful face
   In harvest fields embrown'd, do gaily talk
   Over their ev'ning meal, and bless king Ethwald,
   The valiant yet the peaceful, whose wise rule,
   Firm and rever'd, has brought them better days,
   Than e'er their fathers knew.

Ethw.
   A scene, indeed, fair and desirable;
   But, ah, how much confin'd! Were it not work
   A god befitting, with exerted strength,
   By one great effort to enlarge its bounds,
   And spread the blessing wide?

Eth.

 starting back from him .
   Ha! there it is! that serpent bites thee still!
   O spurn it, strangle it! let it rise no more!

Sel.

 laying his hand affectionately on Ethwald 's breast .
   My dearest brother, let not such wild thoughts
   Again possess your mind!

Ethw.
   Go to! go to!
 To Sel .

   But, Ethelbert, thou'rt mad.


 Turning angrily to Eth .
Eth.
   Not mad, my royal friend, but something griev'd
   To see your restless mind still bent on that,
   Which will to you no real glory bring,
   And to your hapless people many woes.

Ethw.
   Thou greatly errest from my meaning, friend.
   As truly as thyself I do regard
   My people's weal, and will employ the power
   Heav'n trusts me with, for that important end.
   But were it not ignoble to confine
   In narrow bounds the blessed power of blessing,
   Lest, for a little space, the face of war
   Should frown upon us? He who will not give
   Some portion of his ease, his blood, his wealth,
   For others' good, is a poor frozen churl.

Eth.
   Well, then again a simple warrior be,
   And thine own ease, and blood, and treasure give:
   But whilst thou art a king, and wouldst bestow
   On people not thine own the blessed gift
   Of gentle rule, earn'd by the public force
   Of thine own subjects, thou dost give away
   That over which thou hast no right. Frown not:
   I will assert it, crown'd and royal lord,
   Though to your ears full rude the sound may be.

Ethw.
   Chaf'd Thane, be more restrain'd. Thou knowest well,
   That, as a warlike chieftain, never yet
   The meanest of my soldiers grasp'd his spear
   To follow me constrain'd; and as a king,
   Thinkst thou I'll be less noble?

Sel.
   Indeed, good Ethelbert, thou art too warm;
   Thou dealest hardly with him.

Eth.
   I know, though peace dilates the heart of man
   And makes his stores increase, his count'nance smile,
   He is by nature form'd, like savage beasts,
   To take delight in war.


 
   'Tis a strong passion in his bosom lodg'd,
   For ends most wise, curb'd and restrain'd to be;
   And they who for their own designs do take
   Advantage of his nature, act, in truth,
   Like cruel hinds who spirit the poor cock
   To rend and tear his fellow.
   O thou! whom I so often in my arms,
   A bold and gen'rous boy have fondly press'd,
   And now do proudly call my sov'reign lord,
   Be not a cruel master! O be gentle!
   Spare Mercian blood! Goodness and power make
   Most meet companions. The great Lord of all,
   Before whose awful presence, short while since,
   Thou didst expect to stand, almighty is,
   Also most merciful:
   And the bless'd Being He to earth did send
   To teach our soften'd hearts to call him Father,
   Most meekly did confine His heavenly power
   Unto the task assign'd Him. Think of this.
   O! dost thou listen to me?

Ethw.

 moved and softened .
   Yes, good Ethelbert.
   Be thou more calm: we will consider of it.
   We should desire our people's good, and peace
   Makes them to flourish. We confess all this;
   But circumstance oft takes away the power
   Of acting on it. Still our Western neighbours
   Are turbulent and bold; and, for the time,
   Though somewhat humbled, they again may rise
   And force us to the field.

Sel.
   No, fear it not! they are inclin'd to peace;
   Tidings I've learnt, sent by a trusty messenger,
   Who from Caernarvon is with wondrous speed
   But just arriv'd: their valiant prince is dead.
   A sudden death has snatch'd him in his prime;
   And a weak infant, under tutorage
   Of three contending chiefs of little weight,
   Now rules the state, who, thou mayst well perceive,
   Can give thee no disturbance.

Ethw.

 eagerly, with his eyes lightening up, and his whole frame agitated .
   A trusty messenger has told thee this?
   O send him to me quickly! still fair fortune
   Offers her favours freely. Send him quickly!
   Ere yet aware of my returning health,
   Five thousand men might without risk be led
   E'en to their castle walls.

Eth.
                                            What, meanst thou this?
   Uprous'd again unto this dev'lish pitch?
   Oh, it is horrid!

Ethw.

 in great heat .
   Be restrained, Thane.

Eth.
   Be thou restrained, king. See how thou art,
   Thus feebly tott'ring on those wasted limbs?
   And wouldst thou spoil the weak?


 Observing Ethw . who staggers from being agitated beyond his strength. 
Ethw.

 pushing away Selred , who supports him .
   I do not want thine aid: I'm well and vig'rous:
   My heart beats strongly, and my blood is warm;
   Though there are those who spy my weakness out
   To shackle me withal. Ho, thou without!

 Enter his attendant, and Ethw ., taking hold of him, walks across the stage; then turning about to Sel . and Eth .
   Brother, send quickly for your trusty messenger;
   And so, good day. Good morning, Thane of Sexford.


 Looking sternly to Ethelbert .
Eth.
   Good morning, Mercia's king.


 Exeunt by opposite sides, frowningly.
SCENE III.
A grand apartment, with a chair of state. Enter Hexulf and Alwy , engaged in close conversation.
Alwy

 continuing to speak .
   Distrust it not;
   The very honours and high exaltation
   Of Ethelbert, that did your zealous ire
   So much provoke, are now the very tools
   With which we'll work his ruin.

Hex.
   But still proceed with caution; gain the queen;
   For she, from ev'ry hue of circumstance,
   Must be his enemy.

Alwy.
                                            I have done that already,
   By counterfeiting Ethwald's signature
   Whilst in that still and deathlike state he lay,
   To hinder Ethelbert's rash treach'rous haste
   From setting Edward free, I have done that
   For which, though Ethwald thanks me, I must needs,
   On bended knee, for courtly pardon sue.
   The queen I have address'd with humble suit
   My cause to plead with her great lord, and she
   Will her magnificent and high protection
   Give to our party, e'en if on her mind
   No other motive press'd.

Hex.
   I doubt it not, and yet I fear her spirit,
   Proud and aspiring, will desire to rule
   More than befits our purpose.

Alwy.
                                            Fear it not.
   It is the show and worship of high state
   That she delights in, more than real power:
   She has more joy in stretching forth her hand
   And saying, “I command,” than, in good truth,
   Seeing her will obey'd.


Enter Queen, with Dwina and Attendants.
Hex.
   Saint Alban bless you, high and royal dame!
   We are not here, in an intruding spirit,
   Before your royal presence.

Queen.
   I thank you, good lord bishop, with your friend.
   And nothing doubt of your respect and duty.

Alwy.
   Thanks, gracious queen! This good and holy man
   Thus far supports me in your royal favour,


 
   Which is the only rock that I would cling to,
   Willing to give me friendly countenance.

Queen.
   You have done well, good Alwy, and have need
   Of thanks more than of pardon; nevertheless,
   If any trouble light on thee for this,
   A royal hand shall be stretch'd forth to save you,
   Whom none in Mercia, whosoe'er they be,
   Will venture to oppose. I will protect thee,
   And have already much inclin'd the king
   To favour thee.

Alwy

 kneeling and kissing her hand .
   Receive my humble thanks, most honour'd queen.
   My conscience tells me I have merited,
   Of you and of the king, no stern rebuke;
   But that dark cunning Thane has many wiles
   To warp men's minds e'en from their proper good.
   He has attempted, or report speaks falsely,
   To lure King Ethwald to resign his crown.
   What may he not attempt! it makes me shrink!
   He trusts his treasons to no mortal men:
   Fiends meet him in his hall at dead of night,
   And are his counsellors.

Queen

 holding up her hands .
   Protect us, heaven!

Hex.
   Saint Alban will protect you, gracious queen.
   Trust me, his love for pious Oswal's daughter
   Will guard you in the hour of danger. Hark!
   The king approaches.


 Flourish of trumpets.
Queen.
   Yes, at this hour he will receive in state
   The bold address of those seditious Thanes,
   Clam'ring for peace, when fair occasion smiles,
   And beckons him to arm and follow her.

Hex.
   We know it well; of whom Thane Ethelbert,
   In secret is the chief, although young Hereulf
   By him is tutor'd in the spokesman's office.


Enter Ethwald , attended by many Thanes and Officers of the Court, &c.
Queen

 presenting Alwy to Ethw ..
   My lord, a humble culprit at your feet,
   Supported by my favour, craves forgiveness.


 Alwy kneels, and Ethw . raises him graciously.
Ethw.
   I grant his suit, supported by the favour
   Of that warm sense I wear within my breast Of his well-meaning zeal.

 Looking contemptuously at the Queen, who turns haughtily away. 
   But wherefore, Alwy,
   Didst thou not boldly come to me at first
   And tell thy fault? Might not thy former services
   Out-balance well a greater crime than this?

Alwy.
   I so, indeed, had done, but a shrewd Thane,
   Of mind revengeful, and most penetrating,
   Teaches us caution in whate'er regards
   His dealings with the state. I fear the man.

Ethw.
   And wherefore dost thou fear him?

Alwy

 mysteriously .
   He has a cloudy brow, a stubborn gait;
   His dark soul is shut up from mortal man,
   And deeply broods upon its own conceits
   Of right and wrong.

Hex.
   He has a soul black with foul atheism
   And heresies abominable. Nay,
   He has a tongue of such persuasive art,
   That all men listen to him.

Queen

 eagerly .
                                            More than men:
   Dark spirits meet him at the midnight hour,
   And horrid converse hold.

Ethw.
   No, more I pray you! Ethelbert I know.

Queen.
   Indeed, indeed, my lord, you know him not!

Ethw.
   Be silent, wife!

 Turning to Hex . and Al .
   My tried and faithful Alwy,
   And pious Hexulf, in my private closet
   We further will discourse on things of moment,
   At more convenient time.
   The leagued Thanes advance. Retire, Elburga:
   Thou hast my leave. I gave thee no command
   To join thy presence to this stern solemnity.
   Soft female grace adorns the festive hall,
   And sheds a brighter lustre on high days
   Of pageant state; but in an hour like this,
   Destin'd for gravest audience, 'tis unmeet.

Queen.
   What, is the queen an empty bauble, then,
   To gild thy state withal?

Ethw.
   The queens of Mercia, first of Mercian dames,
   Still fair example give of meek obedience
   To their good lords. This is their privilege.

 Seeing that she delays to go.
   It is my will. A good day to your highness.

Queen

 aside as she goes off .
   Be silent, wife! this Mollo's son doth say
   Unto the royal offspring of a king.


 Exit Queen, frowning angrily, and followed by Dwina and attendants. The Thanes, who entered with Ethwald , and during his conversation with Alwy , &c. had retired to the bottom of the stage, now come forward.
Ethw.
   Now wait we for those grave and sluggish chiefs,
   Who would this kingdom, fam'd for warlike Thanes,
   Change into mere provision-land to feed
   A dull unwarlike race.

Alwy.
                                            Ay, and our castles,
   Whose lofty walls are darken'd with the spoils
   Of glorious war, to barns and pinning folds,
   Where our brave hands, instead of sword and spear,
   The pruning knife and shepherd's staff must grasp.

Hex.
   True; sinking you, in such base toils unskill'd,
   Beneath the wiser carl. This is their wish,
   But heav'n and our good saint will bring to nought
   Their wicked machinations.


Enter an Officer of the castle.
Off.
   Th' assembled Thanes, my lord, attend without.



 
Ethw.
   Well, let them enter.
   Our seat beneath us will not shake, I trust,

Exit off.
   Being so fenced round.


 Taking his seat, and bowing courteously with a smiling countenance to the Chiefs, &c. who range themselves near him. 

Enter several Thanes, with Hereulf at their head, and presently after followed by Ethelbert .
Her.

 stretching out his hand with respectful dignity .
   Our king and sire, in true and humble duty
   We come before you, earnestly entreating
   Your royal ear to our united voice.

Ethw.
   Mine ear is ever open'd to the words
   Of faithful duty.

Her.
   We are all men, who in th' embattled field
   Have by your side the front of danger braved,
   With greater lack of prudence than of daring;
   And have opposed our rough and scarred breasts
   To the fell push of war, with liberality
   Not yielding to the bravest of your Thanes,
   The sons of warlike sires. But we are men,
   Who in our cheerful halls have also been
   Lords of the daily feast; where, round our boards,
   The hoary headed warrior, from the toil
   Of arms releas'd, with the cheer'd stranger smiled:
   Who in the humble dwellings of our hinds
   Have seen a numerous and hardy race,
   Eating the bread of labour cheerfully,
   Dealt to them with no hard nor churlish hand.
   We, therefore, stand with graceful boldness forth
   The advocates of those who wish for peace.
   Worn with our rude and long continued wars,
   Our native land wears now the alter'd face
   Of an uncultur'd wild. To her fair fields,
   With weeds and thriftless docks now shagged o'er,
   The aged grandsire, bent and past his toil,
   Who in the sunny nook had plac'd his seat,
   And thought to toil no more, leads joyless forth
   His widow'd daughters and their orphan train,
   The master of a silent, cheerless band.
   The half-grown stripling, urged before his time
   To manhood's labour, steps, with feeble limbs
   And sallow cheek, around his unroof'd cot.
   The mother on her last remaining son
   With fearful bodings looks. The cheerful sound
   Of whistling ploughmen, and the reaper's song,
   And the flail's lusty stroke is heard no more.
   The youth and manhood of our land are laid
   In the cold earth, and shall we think of war?
   O, valiant Ethwald! listen to the calls
   Of gentle pity, in the brave most graceful,
   Nor, for the lust of more extended sway,
   Shed the last blood of Mercia. War is honourable
   In those who do their native rights maintain;
   In those whose swords an iron barrier are
   Between the lawless spoiler and the weak:
   But is in those who draw th' offensive blade
   For added power or gain, sordid and despicable,
   As meanest office of the worldly churl.

Ethw.
   Chiefs and assembled Thanes, I much commend
   The love you bear unto your native land.
   Shame to the son nurs'd on her gen'rous breast
   Who loves her not! and be assured that I,
   Her reared child, her soldier, and her king,
   In true and warm affection yield to none
   Of all who have upon her turfy lap
   Their infant gambols held. To you her weal
   Is gain and pleasure; glory 'tis to me.
   To you her misery is loss and sorrow;
   To me disgrace and shame. Of this be satisfied;
   I feel her sacred claims, which these high ensigns
   Have fastened on me, and I will fulfil them:
   But for the course and manner of performance,
   Be that unto the royal wisdom left,
   Strengthen'd by those appointed by the state
   To aid and counsel it. Ye have our leave,
   With all respect and favour to retire.

Her.
   We will retire, King Ethwald, as becomes
   Free, independent Thanes, who do of right
   Approach or quit at will the royal presence,
   And lacking no permission.

Alwy.
   What, all so valiant in this princely hall,
   Ye who would shrink from the fair field of war,
   Where soldiers should be bold?

Her.

 laying his hand on his sword .
   Thou liest, mean boastful hireling of thy lord,
   And shalt be punish'd for it.

 st Th.

 of Ethwald 's side .
   And dar'st thou threaten, mouth of bold sedition?
   We will maintain his words.


 Draws his sword, and all the Thanes on the King's side do the same. Hereulf and the Thanes of his side also draw their swords.
 st Th.

 of Hereulf 's side .
   Come on, base dealers in your country's blood.

 st Th.

 of Ethwald 's side .
   Have at ye, rebel cowards!

Ethw.

 rising from his seat, and standing between the two parties in a commanding posture .
   I do command you: peace and silence, chiefs!
   He who with word or threat'ning gesture dares
   The presence of his king again to outrage,
   I put without the covert of the law,
   And on the instant punish.


 They all put up their swords, and Ethwald , after looking round him for some moments with commanding sternness, walks off majestically, followed by his Thanes.
Eth.

 casting up his eyes to heaven as he turns to follow Hereulf and his party .
                                            Ah, Mercia,
   Mercia! on red fields of carnage
   Bleed thy remaining sons, and carrion birds
   Tear the cold limbs that should have turn'd thy soil.


 Exeunt the two different parties by opposite sides.


 
ACT II. SCENE I.
A small cavern, in which is discovered a wizard, sitting by a fire of embers, baking his scanty meal of parched corn, and counting out some money from a bag; a book and other things belonging to his art are strewed near him on the ground.
Wiz.

 alone .
   Thanks to the restless soul of Mollo's son!
   Well thrives my trade. Here, the last hoarded coin
   Of the spare widow, trembling for the fate
   Of her remaining son, and the gay jewel
   Of fearful maid, who steals by fall of eve,
   With muffled face, to learn her warrior's doom,
   Lie in strange fellowship; so doth misfortune
   Make strange acquaintance meet.
Enter a Scout.

   Brother, thou com'st in haste; what news, I pray?

Scout.
   Put up thy book, and bag, and wizard's wand:
   This is no time for witchery and wiles.
   Thy cave, I trow, will soon be fill'd with those,
   Who are by present ills too roughly shent
   To look through vision'd spells on those to come.

Wiz.
   What thou wouldst tell me, tell in plainer words.

Scout.
   Well, plainly then, Ethwald, who thought full surely
   The British, in their weak-divided state,
   To the first onset of his arms would yield
   Their ill-defended towers, has found them strengthen'd
   With aid from Wessex. and unwillingly
   Led back with cautions skill the Mercian troops;
   Meaning to tempt the foe, as it is thought,
   To follow him into our open plains,
   Where they must needs with least advantage fight.

Wiz.
   Who told thee this?

Scout.
   Mine eyes have seen them. Scarcely three miles off,
   The armies, at this moment, are engaged
   In bloody battle. On my way I met
   A crowd of helpless women, from their homes
   Who fly with terror, each upon her back
   Bearing some helpless babe or valued piece
   Of household goods snatch'd up in haste. I hear
   Their crowding steps e'en now within your cave:
   They follow close behind.


Enter a crowd of women, young and old, some leading children and carrying infants on their backs or in their arms, others carrying bundles and pieces of household stuff.
Wiz.
   Who are ye, wretched women,
   Who, all so pale and haggard, bear along
   Those hapless infants, and those seeming wrecks,
   From desolation saved? What do you want?

 st wom.
   Nought but the friendly shelter of your cave,
   For now or house, or home, or blazing hearth,
   Good wizard. we have none.

Wiz.
   And are the armies then so near your dwellings?

 st wom.
   Ay, round them, in them the loud battle clangs.
   Within our very walls fierce spearmen push,
   And weapon'd warriors cross their clashing blades.

 d wom.
   Ah, woe is me! our warm and cheerful hearths,
   And rushed floors, whereon our children play'd,
   Are now the bloody lair of dying men.

Old wom.
   Ah, woe is me! those yellow thatched roofs,
   Which I have seen these sixty years and ten,
   Smoking so sweetly 'midst our tufted thorns,
   And the turf'd graves wherein our fathers sleep!

Young wom.
   Ah, woe is me! my little helpless babes!
   Now must some mossy rock or shading tree
   Be your cold home, and the wild haws your food.
   No cheerful blazing fire and seething pot
   Shall now, returning from his daily toil,
   Your father cheer! if that, if that indeed
   Ye have a father still.


 Bursting into tears.
 d wom.
   Alack, alack! of all my goodly stuff
   I've saved but only this! my winter's webs,
   And all the stores that I so dearly saved!
   I thought to have them to my dying day!


Enter a young man leading in an idiot.
Young wom.

 running up to him .
   Ah, my dear Swithick! art thou safe indeed?
   Why didst thou leave me?

Young man.
   To save our idiot brother, seest thou here?
   I could not leave him in that pitiless broil.

Young wom.
   Well hast thou done! poor helpless Balderkin!
   We've fed thee long, unweeting of our care,
   And in our little dwelling still thou'st held
   The warmest nook; and wheresoe'er we be,
   So shalt thou still, albeit thou knowst it not.


Enter man carrying an old man on his back.
Young man.
   And see here, too, our neighbour Edwin comes,
   Bearing his bed-rid father on his back.
   Come in, good man. How dost thou, aged neighbour?
   Cheer up again! thou shalt be shelter'd still;
   The wizard has receiv'd us.

Wiz.
                                            True, good folks;
   I wish my means were better for your sakes.
   But we are crowded here; that winding passage


 
   Leads us into an inner cave full wide,
   Where we may take our room and freely breathe;
   Come, let us enter there.


 Exeunt, all following the wizard into the inner cave.
SCENE II.
A field of battle strewed with slain, and some people seen upon the background searching amongst the dead bodies. Enter Hereulf and Ethelbert .
Her.

 stopping short, and holding up his hands .
   Good mercy! see at what a bloody price
   Ethwald this doubtful victory has purchased,
   That, in the lofty height to which he climbs,
   Will be a little step of small advantage.

Eth.

 not attending to him, and after gazing for some time on the field .
   So thus ye lie, who, with the morning sun,
   Rose cheerily, and girt your armour on
   With all the vigour, and capacity,
   And comeliness of strong and youthful men.
   Ye also, taken in your manhood's wane,
   With grizzled pates, from mates, whose wither'd hands
   For some good thirty years had smooth'd your couch:
   Alas! and ye whose fair and early growth
   Did give you the similitude of men
   Ere your fond mothers ceas'd to tend you still,
   As nurslings of their care, ye lie together!
   Alas! alas! and many now there be,
   Smiling and crowing on their mother's breast,
   Twining, with all their little infant ways,
   Around her hopeful heart, who shall like these,
   Be laid i' the dust.

Her.
   Ay, so it needs must be, since Mollo's son
   Thinks Mercia all too strait for his proud sway.
   But here come those who search among the dead
   For their lost friends; retire, and let us mark them.


 They withdraw to one side.

Enter two Ceorls, meeting a third, who enters by the opposite side.
 st Ceorl.

 to d .
   Thou hast been o'er the field?

 d Ceorl.
   I have, good friend.

 d Ceorl.
   Thou hast seen a rueful sight.

 d Ceorl.
   Yes, I have seen that which no other sight
   Can from my fancy wear. Oh! there be some
   Whose writhed features, fix'd in all the strength
   Of grappling agony, do stare upon you,
   With their dead eyes half open'd.—
   And there be some, struck through with bristling darts,
   Whose clenched hands have torn the pebbles up;
   Whose gnashing teeth have ground the very sand.
   Nay; some I've seen among those bloody heaps,
   Defaced and 'reft e'en of the form of men,
   Who in convulsive motion yet retain
   Some shreds of life more horrible than death;
   I've heard their groans, oh, oh!

 A voice from the ground. 
                                            Baldwick!

 d Ceorl.
   What voice is that? it comes from some one near.

 st Ceorl.
   See, yon stretch'd body moves its bloody hand:
   It must be he.

 Voice again. 
                        Baldwick!

 d Ceorl

 going up to the body from whence the voice came .
                                            Who art thou, wretched man? I know thee not.

Voice.
   Ah, but thou dost! I have sat by thy fire,
   And heard thy merry tales. and shared thy meal.

 d Ceorl.
   Good holy saints! and art thou Athelbald?
   Woe! woe is me to see thee in such case!
   What shall I do for thee?

Voice.
   If thou hast any love or mercy in thee,
   Turn me on my face that I may die;
   For lying thus, seest thou this flooded gash?
   The glutting blood so bolsters up my life
   I cannot die.

 d Ceorl.
   I will, good Athelbald. Alack the day!
   That I should do for thee so sad a service!


 Turns the soldier on his face.
Voice.
   I thank thee, friend, farewell!


 Dies.
 d Ceorl.
   Farewell! farewell! a merry soul thou wert,
   And sweet thy ploughman's whistle in our fields.

 d Ceorl

 starting with horror .
   Good heaven forefend! it moves!

 st Ceorl.
   What dost thou see?

 d Ceorl.
   Look on that bloody corse, so smear'd and mangled,
   That it has lost all form of what it was;
   It moves! it moves! there is life in it still.

 st Ceorl.
   Methought it spoke, but faint and low the sound.

 d Ceorl.
   Ha! didst thou hear a voice? we'll go to it.
   Who art thou? Oh! who art thou?

 To a fallen warrior, who makes signs to him to pull something from his breast.
   Yes, from thy breast; I understand the sign.

 Pulling out a band or 'kerchief from his breast.
   It is some maiden's pledge.

Fallen warrior

 making signs .
   Upon mine arm,
   I pray thee, on mine arm.

 d Ceorl.
   I'll do it, but thy wounds are past all binding.

Warrior.
   She who will search for me doth know this sign.

 d Ceorl.
   Alack, alack: he thinks of some sad maid!
   A rueful sight she'll see! He moves again:
   Heaven grant him peace! I'd give a goodly sum
   To see thee dead, poor wretch!



 

Enter a woman, wailing and wringing her hands.
 d Ceorl.
   Ha! who comes wailing here?

 d Ceorl.
   Some wretched mother who has lost her son:
   I met her searching midst the farther dead,
   And heard her piteous moan.

Mother.
   I rear'd him like a little playful kid,
   And ever by my side, where'er I went,
   He blithely trotted. And full soon, I ween,
   His little arms did strain their growing strength
   To bear my burden. Ay, and long before
   He had unto a stripling's height attain'd,
   He ever would my widow's cause maintain
   With all the steady boldness of a man.
   I was no widow then.

 d Ceorl.
   Be comforted, good mother.

Mother.
   What sayst thou to me? Knowst thou where he lies?
   If thou hast kindness in thee, tell me truly;
   For dead or living still he is mine all,
   And let me have him.

 d Ceorl

 aside to  d .
   Lead her away, good friend; I know her now.
   Her boy is lying with the farther dead,
   Like a fell'd sapling: lead her from the field.


 Exeunt mother and  d Ceorl.
 st Ceorl.
   But who comes now, with such distracted gait,
   Tossing her snowy arms unto the wind,
   And gazing wildly o'er each mangled corse?


Enter a young woman, searching distractedly amongst the dead.
Young wom.
   No, no! thou art not here! thou art not here!
   Yet, if thou be like these, I shall not know thee.
   Oh! if they have so gash'd thee o'er with wounds,
   And marr'd thy comely form! I'll not believe it.
   Until these very eyes have seen thee dead,
   These very hands have press'd on thy cold heart,
   I'll not believe it.

 d Ceorl.
   Ah, gentle maiden! many a maiden's love,
   And many a goodly man lies on this field.

Young wom.
   I know, too true it is, but none like him.
   Liest thou, indeed, amongst those grisly heaps?
   O thou! who ever wert of all most fair!
   If heav'n hath suffer'd this, amen, amen!
   Whilst I have strength to crawl upon the earth,
   I'll search thee out, and be where'er thou art,
   Thy mated love, e'en with the grisly dead.


 Searching again amongst the dead, she perceives the band round the arm of the fallen warrior, and uttering a loud shriek, falls senseless upon the ground. The Ceorls run to her assistance, with Eth . and Her . who come forward from the place they had withdrawn to : Her . clenches his hand, and mutters curses upon Mollo 's son, as he crosses the stage. The scene closes.
SCENE III.
A castle not far from the field of battle. Enter Ethwald and Alwy , talking as they enter.
Ethw.

 calling angrily to some one off the stage .
   And see they do not linger on the road,
   With laggard steps; I will brook no delay.


 To Alwy.  Why, even my very messengers, of late Slothful and sleepy-footed have become: They too must cross my will.  Throws himself upon a seat and sits for some time silent and gloomy.
Alwy.
   Your highness seems disturb'd.
   What though your arms, amidst those British hills,
   Have not, as they were wont, victorious prov'd,
   And home retreating, even on your own soil,
   You've fought a doubtful battle: luckless turns
   Will often cross the lot of greatest kings;
   Let it not so o'ercome your noble spirit.

Ethw.
   Thinkest thou it o'ercomes me?

 Rising up proudly.
   Thou judgest poorly. I am form'd to yield
   To no opposed pressure, nor my purpose
   With crossing chance or circumstance to change.
   I in my march, to this attained height
   Have moved still with an advancing step,
   Direct and onward;
   But now the mountain's side more rugged grows,
   And he who would the cloudy summit gain,
   Must oft into its cragged rents descend
   The higher but to mount.

Alwy.
   Or rather say, my lord, that having gain'd
   Its cloudy summit, there you must contend
   With the rude tempests that do beat upon it.

Ethw.

 smiling contemptuously .
   Is this thy fancy?
   Are thy thoughts of Ethwald
   So poorly limited, that thou dost think
   He has already gain'd his grandeur's height?
   Know that the lofty point which oft appears,
   To him who stands beneath, the mountain's top,
   Is to the daring climber who hath reach'd it
   Only a breathing place, from whence he sees
   Its real summit, bright and heav'n-illum'd,
   Towering majestic, grand, above him far,
   As is the lofty spot on which he stands
   To the dull plain below.
   The British once subdued, Northumberland,
   Thou seest well, could not withstand our arms.
   It too must fall; and with such added strength,
   What might not be achiev'd? Ay, by this arm!
   All that the mind suggests, even England's crown,
   United and entire. Thou gazest on me.
   I know full well the state is much exhausted
   Of men and means; and those curs'd Mercian women
   To cross my purposes, with hag-like spite,


 
   Do nought but females bear. But I will onward.
   Still conscious of its lofty destination,
   My spirit swells, and will not be subdued.

Alwy.
   I, chidden, bow, and yield with admiration
   Unto the noble grandeur of your thoughts.
   But lowering clouds arise; events are adverse;
   Subdue your secret enemies at home,
   And reign securely o'er the ample realm
   You have so bravely won.

Ethw.
   What! have I through the iron fields of war
   Proudly before th' admiring gaze of men,
   Unto this point with giant steps held on,
   Now to become a dwarf? Have I this crown
   In bloody battles won, mocking at death,
   To wear it now as those to whom it comes
   By dull and leaden-paced inheritance;
   As the dead shepherd's scrip and knotted crook
   Go to his milk-fed son? Like those dull images,
   On whose calm, tamed brows, the faint impression
   Of far preceding heroes faintly rests,
   As the weak colours of a fading rainbow
   On a spent cloud!
   I'd rather in the centre of the earth
   Inclosed be, to dig my upward way
   To the far distant light, than stay me thus,
   And, looking round upon my bounded state,
   Say, this is all. No; lower as it may,
   I'll to the bold aspirings of my mind
   Still steady prove, whilst that around my standard
   Harness doth clatter, or a falchion gleam.

Alwy.
   What boot the bold aspirings of the great,
   When secret foes beneath his footsteps work
   Their treach'rous mine?

Ethw.
   Ay, thou before hast hinted of such foes.

Alwy.
   Fear for your safety, king, may make me err:
   But these combined chiefs, it is full plain,
   Under the mask of zeal for public good,
   Do court with many wiles your people's hearts;
   Breathing into their ears the praise of peace,
   Yea, and of peaceful kings. The thralled Edward,
   Whose prison-tower stands distant from this castle
   But scarce a league—

Ethw.

 starting .
   Is it so near us?

Alwy.
   It is, my lord.
   Nor is he so forgotten in the land,
   But that he still serves their dark purpose well.
   An easy gentle prince—so brave, yet peaceful—
   With such impressions clogg'd your soldiers fight,
   And therefore 'tis that with a feeble foe
   Ethwald fights doubtful battles.

Ethw.
   Thou art convinced of this?

Alwy.
   Most perfectly.

Ethw.
   I too have had such thoughts, and have repress'd them.

Alwy.
   Did not those base petitioners for peace
   Withhold their gather'd forces, till beset
   On ev'ry side they saw your little army,
   Already much diminish'd? then came they,
   Like heaven-commission'd saviours, to your aid,
   And drew unto themselves the praise of all.
   This plainly speaks, your glory with disgrace
   They fain would dash, to set their idol up;
   For well they think, beneath the gentle Edward
   To lord it proudly, and his gen'rous nature
   Has won their love and pity. Ethelbert
   Now that such fair occasion offers to them,
   The prisoner's escape may well effect:
   He lacks not means.

Ethw.

 after a thoughtful pause .
   Didst thou not say, that castle's foggy air,
   And walls with dampness coated, to young blood
   Are hostile and creative of disease?
   In close confinement he has been full long;
   Is there no change upon him?

Alwy.
   Some hardy natures will resist all change.


 A long pause, in which Ethwald seems thoughtful and disturbed.
Ethw.

 abruptly .
   Once in the roving fantasies of night,
   Methought I slew him.

Alwy.
   Dreams, as some think, oft show us things to come.


 Another long pause, in which Ethwald seems greatly disturbed, and stands fixed to one spot, till catching Alwy 's eye fastened steadfastly upon his, he turns from him abruptly, and walks to the bottom of the stage with hasty strides. Going afterwards to the door, he turns suddenly round to Alwy just as he is about to go out.
Ethw.
   What Thane was he, who, in a cavern'd vault,
   His next of kin so long imprison'd kept,
   Whilst on his lands he liv'd?

Alwy.
   Yes, Ruthal's Thane he was; but dearly he
   The dark contrivance rued; fortune at last
   The weary thrall reliev'd, and ruin'd him.

Ethw.

 agitated .
   Go where thy duty calls thee; I will in:
   My head feels strangely; I have need of rest


 Exit.
Alwy

 looking after him with a malicious satisfaction .
   Ay, dark perturbed thoughts will be thy rest.
   I see the busy workings of thy mind.
   The gentle Edward has not long to mourn
   His earthly thraldom. I have done my task,
   And soon shall be secure; for while he lives,
   And Ethelbert, who hates my artful rise,
   I live in jeopardy.


 Exit.


 
SCENE IV
A small dark passage. Enter Ethwald with a lamp in his hand: enter at the same time, by the opposite side, a domestic officer; they both start back on seeing one another.
Ethw.
   Who art thou?

Off.
   Baldwin, my lord. But mercy on my sight,
   Your face is strangely alter'd. At this hour
   Awake, and wandering thus!—Have you seen aught?

Ethw.
   No, nothing. Knowst thou which is Alwy's chamber?
   I would not wake my grooms.

Off.
   It is that farther door; I'll lead you to it.


 Pointing off the stage.
Ethw.
   No, friend, I'll go myself. Good rest to
   thee.


 Exeunt.
SCENE V.
A small dark chamber, with a low couch near the front of the stage, on which Alwy is discovered asleep. Enter Ethwald with a haggard countenance, bearing a lamp.
Ethw.
   He sleeps—I hear him breathe—he soundly sleeps,
   Seems not this circumstance to check my purpose,
   And bid me still to pause?

 Setting down the lamp. 
   But wherefore pause?
   This deed must be, or, like a scared thief
   Who starts and trembles o'er his grasped store
   At ev'ry breezy whisper of the night,
   I now must wear this crown, which I have bought
   With brave men's blood, in fields of battle shed.
   Ah! would that all it cost had there been shed!
   This deed must be; for, like a haggard ghost
   His image haunts me wheresoe'er I move,
   And will not let me rest.
   His love hath been to me my bosom's sting;
   His gen'rous trust hath gnaw'd me like a worm.
   Oh! would a swelt'ring snake had wreath'd my neck
   When first his arms embraced me!
   He is by fortune made my bane, my curse,
   And, were he gentle as the breast of love,
   I needs must crush him.
   Prison'd or free, where'er he breathes, lives one
   Whom Ethwald fears. Alas! this thing must be,
   From th' imaged form of which I still have shrunk,
   And started back as from my fancy's fiend.
   The dark and silent cope of night is o'er us,
   When vision'd horrors, through perturbed sleep,
   Harden to deeds of blood the dreamer's breast;
   When from the nether world fell demons rise
   To guide with lurid flames the murd'rer's way.
   I'll wake him now; should morning dawn upon me,
   My soul again might from its purpose swerve.

 In a loud energetic voice. 
   Alwy, awake! sleepest thou? sleepest thou, Alwy?

 Alwy wakes. 
   Nay, rouse thyself, and be thou fully waking.
   What I would say must have thy mind's full bent;
   Must not be spoken to a drowsy ear.

Alwy

 rising quickly .
   I fully am awake; I hear, I see,
   As in the noon of day.

Ethw.
                                            Nay, but thou dost not.
   Thy garish eye looks wildly on the light,
   Like a strange vistor.

Alwy.
   So do the eyes of one pent in the dark,
   When sudden light breaks on them, though he slept not.
   But why, my lord, at this untimely hour,
   Are you awake, and come to seek me here?

Ethw.
   Alwy, I cannot sleep: my mind is toss'd
   With many warring thoughts. I am push'd on
   To do the very act from which my soul
   Has still held back: fate doth compel me to it.

Alwy.
   Being your fate, who may its power resist?

Ethw.
   E'en call it so, for it, in truth, must be.
   Knowst thou one who would do a ruthless deed,
   And do it pitifully?

Alwy.
   He who will do it surest, does it best!
   And he who surely strikes, strikes quickly too,
   And therefore pitifully strikes. I know
   A brawny ruffian, whose firm clenched gripe
   No struggles can unlock; whose lifted dagger,
   True to its aim, gives not a second stroke!

Ethw.

 covering his face hastily .
   Oh! must it needs be so?

 Catching Alwy eagerly by the arm. 
                                            But hark thee well!
   I will have no foul butchery done upon him.

Alwy.
   It shall be done, e'en to the smallest tittle,
   As you yourself shall order.

Ethw.
   Nay, nay! do thou contrive the fashion of it,
   I've done enough.

Alwy.
   But, good my lord! cast it not from you thus:
   There must be warrant and authority
   For such a deed, and strong protection too.

Ethw.
   Well, well, thou hast it all: thou hast my word.

Alwy.
   Ay, but the murder'd corse must be inspected,
   That no deceit be fear'd, nor after doubts;
   Nor bold impostors rising in the North,
   Protected by your treach'rous Thanes, and plum'd,
   To scare you afterwards with Edward's name.

Ethw.
   Have not thine eyes on bloody death oft look'd?
   Do it thyself.



 
Alwy.
   If you, my lord, will put this trust in me,
   Swear that when after-rumours shall arise,
   As like there may, your faith will be unshaken.

Ethw.
   Yes; I will truly trust thee—

 Vehemently, after a short pause. 
   No, I will not!
   I'll trust to no man's vision but mine own.
   Is the moon dark to-night?

Alwy.
                                            It is, an please you.

Ethw.
   And will be so to-morrow?

Alwy.
                                            Yes, my lord.

Ethw.
   When all is still in sleep—I hear a noise.

Alwy.
   Regard it not, it is the whisp'ring winds
   Along those pillar'd walls.

Ethw.
   It is a strange sound, though. Come to my chamber,
   I will not here remain: come to my chamber,
   And do not leave me till the morning break.
   I am a wretched man!


 Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A gloomy vaulted apartment in an old castle, with no windows to it, and a feeble light burning in one corner. Enter Edward from a dark recess near the bottom of the stage, with slow pensive steps, frequently stopping as he advances, and remaining for some time in a thoughtful posture.
Edw.
   Doth the bright sun from the high arch of heaven
   In all his beauteous robes of flecker'd clouds,
   And ruddy vapours, and deep glowing flames,
   And softly varied shades, look gloriously?
   Do the green woods dance to the wind; the lakes
   Cast up their sparkling waters to the light?
   Do the sweet hamlets in their bushy dells
   Send winding up to heaven their curling smoke
   On the soft morning air?
   Do the flocks bleat, and the wild creatures bound
   In antic happiness, and mazy birds
   Wing the mid air in lightly skimming bands?
   Ay, all this is; all this men do behold;
   The poorest man. Even in this lonely vault,
   My dark and narrow world, oft do I hear
   The crowing of the cock so near my walls,
   And sadly think how small a space divides me
   From all this fair creation.
   From the wide spreading bounds of beauteous nature,
   I am alone shut out; I am forgotten.
   Peace, peace! He who regards the poorest worm
   Still cares for me, albeit He shends me sorely.
   This hath its end. Perhaps, small as these walls,
   A bound unseen divides my dreary state
   From a more beauteous world; that world of souls,
   Fear'd and desir'd by all: a veil unseen
   Which soon shall be withdrawn.

 Casts up his eyes to heaven, and turning, walks silently to the bottom of the stage, then advancing again to the front.
   The air feels chill; methinks it should be night.
   I'll lay me down: perchance kind sleep will come,
   And open to my view an inward world
   Of garish fantasies, from which nor walls,
   Nor bars, nor tyrant's power, can shut me out.


 He wraps himself in a cloak and lies down. Enter a ruffian, stealing up softly to him as supposing him asleep. Edward , hearing him, uncovers his face, and then starts up immediately.
Edw.
   What art thou?
   Or man or sprite? Thou lookest wondrous stern,
   What dost thou want? Com'st thou to murder me?

Ruff.
   Yes, I am come to do mine office on thee;
   Thy life is wretched, and my stroke is sure.

Edw.
   Thou sayest true; yet, wretched as it is,
   It is my life, and I will grapple for it.

Ruff.
   Full vainly wilt thou strive, for thinkest thou
   We enter walls like these with changeling hearts,
   To leave our work undone?

Edw.
                                            We, sayest thou?
   There are more of you then?

Ruff.
   Ay, ay, there are enow to make it sure;
   But, if thou wilt be quiet, I'll do't myself.
   Mine arm is strong; I'll give no second stroke;
   And all escape is hopeless.

Edw.
   What, thinkest thou I'll calmly stretch my neck
   Until thou butch'rest me?
   No, by good heaven! I'll grapple with thee still,
   And die with my blood hot!


 Putting himself in a posture of defence.
Ruff.
   Well, since thou'lt have it so, thou soon shalt see
   If that my mates be lovelier than myself.


 Exit.
Edw.
   O that I still in some dark cell could rest,
   And wait the death of nature!

 Looking wildly round upon the roof and walls of the vault.
   Nor stone, nor club, nor beam to serve my need!
   Out from the walls, ye flints, and fill my grasp!
   Nought! nought! Is there not yet within this nook
   Some bar or harden'd brand that I may clutch?


 Exit hastily into the dark recess, and is followed immediately by two ruffians, who enter by the opposite side, and cross the stage after him.
SCENE II.
An apartment adjoining to the former, with a door leading to it at the bottom of the stage. Enter Alwy with a stern anxious face, and listens at the door; then enter, by the opposite side , Ethwald with a very haggard countenance.
Ethw.
   Dost thou hear aught?

Alwy.
                                            No, nothing.



 
Ethw.
   But thou dost:
   Is it not done?

Alwy.
                                            I hope it is, my lord.

Ethw.
   Thou doubtest, then.—It is long past the hour
   That should have lapp'd it. Hark! I hear a noise.


 A noise heard within of people struggling.
Alwy.
   They are dealing with him now. They struggle hard.

Ethw.

 turning away with horror, and putting his hands upon his ears .
   Ha! are we then so near it? This is horrid!

 After a pause.
   Is it not done yet? Dost thou hear them still?

Alwy.
   I hear them still: they struggle harder now.


 The noise within heard more distinctly.
Ethw.
   By hell's dark host, thy fiends are weak of arm,
   And cannot do their task! He will break forth,
   With all the bloody work half done upon him!

 Running furiously to the door, and then shuddering, and turning away from it.
   No, no, I cannot go! do thou go in,
   And give thy strength. Let him be still'd i' the instant.


 A noise heard within of one falling.
Alwy.
   There's no need now: did you not hear him fall?

 A groan heard within.
   And that groan too? List, list! The deed is done.


 They both retire from the door, and Ethw . leaning his back against the wall, looks steadfastly towards it in silent expectation, whilst it is seen to open slowly a little way, then shut, then open again, without any one appearing.
Ethw.
   What may this mean? This pause is horrible!
   Will they or enter quickly or forbear?


Enter  st ruffian, with his hands and clothes bloody, and all his hair and dress in disorder, like one who has been struggling hard. Enter soon after him  d ruffian in a similar plight.
Alwy

 eagerly .
   Ye've done it: is he dead?

 st ruff.
   He is still'd now; but with such horrid strength
   He grappled with us! we have had fell work.

Alwy.
   Then let us see the body.

 st ruff.
   Yes, enter if it please ye.

Alwy.
   Be pleased, my lord.


 To Ethw .
Ethw.
   Pray thee be satisfied: I cannot go.

Alwy

 to the ruffians .
   Bring ye the body hither.


 Exeunt ruffians.

 A silent pause.—Re-enter ruffians bearing the body, and laying it down before Ethw .
   Look here, my lord, and be well satisfied:
   It is his very face, though somewhat changed
   With long confinement in these sickly damps,
   And the convulsive throes of violent death.

Ethw.

 first shrinking from it with horror, then commanding himself, and looking upon it for some time steadfastly .
   Yes, changed indeed! and yet I know it well.
   Ah! changed indeed! Much he must needs have suffer'd
   In his lone prison-house. Thou bruised flower!
   And hast thou struggled all so bravely too
   For thy most wretched life? Base, bloody work!
   Remove it from my sight.


 Turning hastily from it.
Alwy.
   What farther orders would you give these men?

Ethw.
   Away! speak to me not! thou'st made me curs'd!
   Would all the realm of Mercia I had lost,
   Ere it had come to this!
   Once in the battle's heat I sav'd his life.
   And he did bless me for it.


 Beating his forehead distractedly.
Alwy.
   Nay, good my lord, be not so keenly moved.
   Where shall we lay the body?

Ethw.
   Thou and those fiends do with it as ye will:
   It is a damned work!


 Exit hastily.
Alwy

 to  st ruf. 
   Come thou with me.

 To  d ruf. 
   We will return anon;
   Meanwhile remain thou here and watch the corpse.


 Exeunt Alwy and  st ruf.
 d ruf.

 alone .
   Watch it! I would not watch it here alone
   For all my ruffian's hire.


 Throws a coarse cloth over the body, and exit hastily.
SCENE III.
A Saxon hall in the former castle. Enter Elb . and Dwina , talking earnestly as they enter.
Elb.
   But didst thou truly question ev'ry groom,
   And the stern keeper of that postern gate?

Dwi.
   I have, but no one knew that he is absent.
   'Twas dark night when the king went forth, and Alwy
   Alone was with him. This is all I know.

Elb
   Thus secretly, at night! Sexford's castle
   Is not far distant.—That distracted maid—
   If this be so, by the true royal blood
   That fills my veins, I'll be reveng'd! What meanst thou?


 Seeing Dwina shake her head piteously.
Dwi.
   Alas! you need not fear; far distant stand
   The towers of Ethelbert; and that poor maid
   With the quiet dead has found at last her rest.

Elb.
   And is't not well? Why dost thou shake thy head,
   As though thou toldst sad news?—Yet what avails it?
   I ne'ertheless must be a humble mate,


 
   With scarcely e'en the semblance of a queen,
   And bow my head whilst Mollo's son doth say,
   “Be silent, wife.”—Shall I endure all this?
   O Edward! gentle ething! thou who once
   Didst bear the title of my future lord,
   Wouldst thou have used me thus? I'll not endure it.

Dwi.
   Yet be more patient.

Elb.
   Be patient, sayst thou? Go to, for I hate thee,
   When thou so calmly talkst. Though seemingly,
   I oft before his keen commanding eye
   Submissive am, thinkst thou I am subdued?
   No, by my royal race! I'll not endure it:
   I will unto the bishop with my wrongs;
   Rever'd and holy men shall do me right:
   And here he comes unsent for; this my hope
   Calls a good omen.


Enter Hexulf .
                                            Good and holy father,
   I crave your blessing.

Hex.
   Thou hast it, royal daughter. Art thou well?
   Thou seemst disorder'd.

Elb.
   Yes, rev'rend father, I am sorely gall'd
   Beneath a heavy and ignoble yoke;
   My crowned head is in subjection bow'd,
   Like meanest household dame; and thinkest thou
   That it becomes the daughter of a king,
   The chief descendant of your royal race,
   To bear all this, and say that she is well?

Hex.
   My daughter, your great lord indeed is form'd
   Of soul more stern than was the gentle Edward,
   On whom your maiden fancy first was taught
   To dwell with sanguine hope.

Elb.
   O holy Hexulf! thou hast nam'd a name
   Which to my conscience gives such secret pangs:
   Oh! I have done such wrong to that sweet youth,
   My heart bleeds at the cruel thought. I would—
   Yea, there is nothing that I would not do
   In reparation of the wrong I've done him.
   Speak, my good father, if thou aught canst say:
   Edward, 'tis said, has many powerful friends
   In secret still devoted to his cause,
   And not far distant stands his dreary tower.
   O speak to me!—Thou turnst away thy head
   Disturb'd and frowningly: hast thou no counsel
   For a soul-smitten and distracted woman?


 Laying her clasped hands earnestly on his shoulder, as he turns from her much displeased.
Hex.
   Daughter, forbear! you are indeed distracted.
   Ethwald, by right of holy bands your lord,
   Is in his seat too firmly fix'd; and Edward
   Is only by some restless Thanes desired,
   Under the influence of that dark wizard,
   That heretic who still ensnares the young.
   Be wise then, I beseech you, and in peace
   Live in the meek subjection of a wife.

Elb.

 stepping back from him with haughty contempt .
   And so, meek, holy man, this is your counsel,
   Breath'd from the gentle spirit of your state.
   I've seen the chafings of your saintly ire
   Restrain'd with less concern for sober duty,
   When aught pertaining to your priestly rights
   Was therein touch'd.

Dwi.
   Hush! Ethelbert approaches with his friends:
   They come, methinks, at an unwonted hour.

Hex.
   That artful heretic regards not times;
   His spells still show to him the hour best suiting
   His wicked purposes.

Dwi.
   Heaven save us all! methinks at his approach
   The air grows chill around us, and a hue
   Of strange unnatural paleness spreads o'er all.

Elb.

 to Dwi .
   Peace, fool! thy fancy still o'ertops
   thy wit.


Enter Selred, Ethelbert , and Hereulf .
Eth.
   In your high presence, gracious dame, we are
   Thus early visitors, upon our way
   To crave admittance to the royal chamber.
   Is the king stirring yet? Forgive my boldness.

Elb.
   Good Ethelbert, thou dost me no offence;
   And you, Lord Selred, and brave Hereulf too,
   I bid good morrow to you all. The king
   Is not within his chamber: unattended
   Of all but Alwy, at the close of night
   He did go forth, and is not yet return'd.

Sel.
   This much amazes me: the moon was dark,
   And cold and rudely blew the northern blast.

Dwi.

 listening .
   Hark! footsteps sound along the secret passage:
   Look to yon door, for something moves the bolt.
   The king alone that sacred entry treads.


Enter Ethwald from a small secret door, followed by Alwy , and starts back upon seeing Ethelbert , &c.
Ethw.

 recovering from his confusion .
   A good and early morrow to you all:
   I little thought—you are astir betimes.

Eth.
   The same to you, my lord, with loving duty.

Sel.
   And you too, royal brother, you are moving
   At an unwonted hour. But you are pale!
   A ghastly hollow look is in your eyes!
   What sudden stratagem of nightly war
   Has call'd you forth at such untimely season?
   The night was dark and cold, the north wind blew,


 
   And if that I can read that alter'd brow,
   You come not back unscath'd.

Ethw.

 confused .
   No, I am well.—The blast has beat against me,
   And tossing boughs my tangled pathway cross'd:
   In sooth I've held contention with the night.

Sel.
   Yea, in good sooth, thou lookest too like one
   Who has contention held with damned sprites.
   Hast thou not cross'd that glen where, as 'tis said,
   The restless ghost of a dead murd'rer stalks?
   Thou shudd'rest and art pale! O, thou hast seen it:
   Thou hast indeed the haggard face of one
   Who has seen fearful things.

Ethw.
   Thou'rt wild and fanciful: I have seen nothing:
   I am forespent and faint; rest will restore me.
   Much good be to you all!


 Going. 
Eth.

 preventing him .
   Nay, on your royal patience, gracious king.
   We must a moment's trespass make, to plead
   For one, upon whose brave but gentle soul
   The night of thraldom hangs.—

Ethw.

 shrinking back .
   I know—I know thy meaning—speak it not.
   It cannot be—there was a time—'tis past.

Sel.
   O say not so; the time for blessed mercy
   Is ever present. For the gentle Edward,
   We'll pledge our lives, and give such hostages
   As shall secure your peace.

Eth.
                                            Turn not away;
   We plead for one whose meek and gen'rous soul
   Most unaspiring is, and full of truth;
   For one who lov'd you, Ethwald; one by nature
   Form'd for the placid love of all his kind;
   One who did ever in your growing fame
   Take most unenvious joy. Such is our thrall:
   Yea, and the boon that we do crave for him
   Is but the free use of his cramped limbs,
   And leave to breathe, beneath the cope of heaven.
   The wholesome air; to see the cheering sun;
   To be again reckon'd with living men.


 Kneeling and clasping his knees.
Ethw.
   Let go, dark Thane; thou rackst me with thy words;
   They are vain sounds:—the wind has wail'd as thou dost,
   And pled as sadly too. But that must be
   What needs must be. Reckon'd with living men!
   Would that indeed—O would that this could be!
   The term of all is fix'd.—Good night to you—
   I—I should say good morning, but this light
   Glares strangely on mine eyes.


 Breaking from Eth .
Sel.

 following him .
   My dearest brother, by a brother's love!

Ethw.

 putting him away with great agitation .
   My heart no kindred holds with human thing.


 Exit quickly, in great perturbation, followed by Alwy .
Sel. and Hereulf

 looking expressively at each other, and then at Ethelbert .
   Good Ethelbert, what ails thee?

Her.
   Thy fix'd look has a dreadful meaning in it.

Eth.
   Let us begone.

Sel.
   No, do not yield it so. I still will plead
   The gentle Edward's cause: his frowns I fear not.

Eth.
   Come, come; there is no cause; Edward is free.

Sel.
   How so? thou speakst it with a woeful voice.

Eth.
   Is not the disembodied spirit free?

Sel.
   Ha! thinkst thou that?—No, no; it cannot be.

Her.

 stamping on the ground, and grasping his sword .
   I'll glut my sword with the foul murd'rer's blood,
   If such foul deed hath been.

Eth.
   Hush, hush, intemp'rate boy! Let us begone.


 Exeunt Eth., Sel ., and Her .
Elb.

 to Dwi .
   Heardst thou how they conceive it?

Dwi.
   Ay, mercy! and it is a fearful thought!
   It glanc'd e'en o'er my mind before they spoke.

Elb.
   Thou'rt silent, rev'rend father; are thy thoughts
   Of such dark hue?


 With solemn earnestness to Hex .
Hex.
   Heaven's will be done in all things! erring man
   Bows silently. Good health attend your greatness.

Elb.
   Nay, go not yet, good Hexulf: in my closet
   I much desire some converse with thee. Thou,
   Belike, hast misconceiv'd what I have utter'd
   In unadvised passion, thinking surely
   It bore some meaning 'gainst my lord the king.

Hex.
   No, gracious daughter, I indeed receiv'd it
   As words of passion. You are mov'd, I see:
   But let not this dismay you: if the king
   Has done the deed suspicion fastens on him,
   We o'er his mind shall hold the surer sway.
   A restless penitent will docile prove
   To priestly counsel: this will be our gain.
   But in your closet we'll discourse of this.
   Heaven's will be done in all things!


 Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
The King's chamber. Enter Ethwald with a thoughtful miserable look, and stands silently muttering to himself, when Alwy enters in haste, followed by an Officer.
Alwy.
   Pardon, my lord; we bring you pressing tidings.

Ethw.

 angrily .
   Shall I ne'er rest in peace in mine own chamber?
   Ha! would that peace were there!—You bring me tidings;
   And from what quarter come they?

Alwy.
   From Utherbald, who holds your western fortress.



 
Ethw.
   He doth not yield, I hope, unto the foe.
   It is my strongest hold, and may defy
   The strength of Wessex and of Britain join'd.

Off.
   True, king, but famine all things will subdue.

Ethw.
   He has surrender'd, then: by heaven and hell
   I'll have his head for this!

Alwy.
                                            No, royal Ethwald,
   It is not yet so bad; but this brave man,
   Commission'd by himself, will tell you all.

Ethw.
   Speak, warrior: then he holds the fortress still?

Off.
   He does, my lord, but much he lives in fear,
   He shall not hold it long, unless your highness
   Will give your warrant to release the prisoners;
   Those ill designing Mercians whom your wisdom
   Under his guard has placed.
   He bade me say the step is dangerous;
   But, if it is not done, those idle mouths,
   Consuming much, will starve him and his men
   Into compliance with the foe's demand.
   What is your sov'reign will? for on the instant
   I must return.

Ethw.
   Tell him this is no time for foolish hazard.
   Let them be put to death.

Off.

 shrinking back .
   Must I return with this?
   All put to death?

Ethw.
   Yes, I have said: didst thou not hear my words?

Off.
   I heard, in truth, but mine ears strangely rung.
   Good saints there are, my lord, within our walls,
   Close pris'ners kept, of war-bred men alone.
   Of whom, I trow, there scarcely is a man
   Who has not some fair stripling by his side
   Sharing the father's bonds, threescore and ten;
   And must they all—

Ethw.
                                            I understand thee, fool.
   Let them all die! have I not said it? Go:
   Linger not here, but bear thy message quickly.
 Exit officer sorrowfully.

 Angrily to Alwy .

   What! thou lookest on me too, as if, forsooth,
   Thou wert amaz'd at this. Perceiv'st thou not
   How hardly I'm beset to keep the power
   I have so dearly bought? Shall this impede me?
   Let infants shrink! I have seen blood enough;
   And what have I to do with mercy now?

 Stalking gloomily away, then returning.
   Selred and Ethelbert, and fiery Hereulf,
   Are to their castles sullenly retired,
   With many other warlike Thanes. The storm
   Is gath'ring round me, but we'll brave it nobly.

Alwy.
   The discontented chiefs, as I'm inform'd
   By faithful spies, are in the halls of Hereulf
   Assembled, brooding o'er their secret treason.

Ethw.
   Are they? Then let us send a chosen band,
   And seize them unprepared. A nightly march
   Will bring them near his castle. Let us then
   Immediate orders give; the time is precious.


 Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
An apartment in the royal castle or chief residence of Ethwald. Dwina and several of the ladies serving the Queen are discovered at work; some spinning, some winding coloured yarns for the loom, and some embroidering after a rude fashion.
Dwi.

 looking over the  st lady's work .
   How speeds thy work? The queen is now impatient;
   Thou must be diligent.

 st lady.
   Nine weary months have I, thou knowest well,
   O'er this spread garment bent, and yet thou seest
   The half is scarcely done. I lack assistance.

Dwi.
   And so thou dost, but yet in the wide realm
   None can be found but such as lack the skill
   For such assistance. All those mingled colours,
   And mazy circles, and strange carved spots,
   Look, in good sooth, as though the stuff were strew'd
   With rich and curious things: though much I fear
   To tell you what would prove no easy task.

 d lady.
   There lives a dame in Kent, I have been told,
   Come from some foreign land, if that indeed
   She be no cunning fiend in woman's garb,
   Who, with her needle, can most cunningly
   The true and perfect semblance of real flowers,
   With stalk and leaves, as fairly fashion out
   As if upon a summer bank they grew.

 st lady.
   Ay, ay! no doubt! thou hearst strange tales, I ween.
   Didst thou not tell us how, in foreign lands
   Full far from this, the nice and lazy dames
   Do set foul worms to spin their silken yarn?
   Ha, ha!


 They all laugh.
 d lady

 angrily .
   I did not say so.

 st lady.
   Nay, nay, but thou didst!


 Laughing. 
 d lady.
   Thou didst mistake me wilfully, in spite,
   Malicious as thou art!

Dwi.
   I pray you wrangle not! when ladies work,
   They should tell pleasant tales or sweetly sing,
   Not quarrel rudely, thus, like villains' wives.
   Sing me, I pray you now, the song I love.
   You know it well: let all your voices join.

Omnes.
   We will, good Dwina.


SONG.       Wake awhile and pleasant be,
      Gentle voice of melody!


 
      Say, sweet carol, who are they
      Who cheerly greet the rising day?
      Little birds in leafy bower;
      Swallows twitt'ring on the tower;
      Larks upon the light air borne;
      Hunters rous'd with shrilly horn;
      The woodman whistling on his way;
      The new-waked child at early play,
      Who barefoot prints the dewy green,
      Winking to the sunny sheen;
   And the meek maid who binds her yellow hair,
   And blithely doth her daily task prepare.

      Say, sweet carol, who are they
      Who welcome in the evening grey?
      The housewife trim and merry lout,
      Who sit the blazing fire about;
      The sage a conning o'er his book;
      The tired wight, in rushy nook,
      Who half asleep, but faintly hears
      The gossip's tale hum in his ears;
      The loosen'd steed in grassy stall;
      The proud Thanes feasting in the hall;
   But most of all the maid of cheerful soul,
   Who fills her peaceful warrior's flowing bowl.

      Well hast thou said! and thanks to thee,
      Voice of gentle melody!


Dwi.

 to d lady, who sits sad and pensive .
   What is the matter, Ella? thy sweet voice
   Was wont to join the song.

Ella.
   Ah, woe is me! within these castle walls,
   Under this very tower in which we are,
   There be those, Dwina, who no sounds do hear
   But the chill winds that o'er their dungeons howl;
   Or the still tinkling of the water-drops
   Falling from their dank roofs, in dull succession,
   Like the death watch at sick men's beds. Alas!
   While you sing cheerly thus, I think of them.

Dwi.
   Ay, many a diff'rent lot of joy and grief
   Within a little compass may be found.
   Under one roof the woeful and the gay
   Do oft abide; on the same pillow rest.
   And yet, if I may rightly judge, the king
   Has but small joy above his wretched thralls.
   Last night I listened to his restless steps,
   As oft he paced his chamber to and fro,
   Right o'er my head, and I did hear him utter
   Such heavy groans!

 st lady

 with all the others gathering about Dwina curiously .
   Didst thou? And utter'd he no other sound?
   I've heard it whisper'd, at the dead of night
   He sees strange things.

All

 speaking together .
   O tell us, Dwina! tell us!

Dwi.
   Out on you all! you hear such foolish tales!
   He is himself the ghost that walks the night,
   And cannot rest.

Ella.
   Belike he is devising in his mind
   How he shall punish those poor prisoners,
   Who were in Hereulf's tower surpris'd so lately,
   And now are in these hollow vaults confin'd.

 st lady.
   No marvel that it should disturb him much,
   When his own brother is among the guilty.
   There will be bloody doings soon, I trow!

Dwi.
   Into the hands of good and pious Hexulf
   The rebels will be put, so to be punish'd
   As he in holy zeal shall see it meet.

Ella.
   Then they will dearly suffer.

Dwi.
   That holy man no tortures will devise.

Ella.
   Yes, so perchance, no tortures of the flesh;
   But there be those that do upon the soul
   The rack and pincer's work.
   Is he not grandson to that vengeful chief,
   Who, with the death-axe lifted o'er his head,
   Kept his imprison'd foe a live-long night,
   Nor, till the second cock had crow'd the morn,
   Dealt him the clemency of death? Full well
   He is his child I know!

Dwi.
   What aileth thee? art thou bewitched also?
   Lamentest thou that cursed heretics
   Are put in good men's power? The sharpest punishment
   O'er-reaches not their crime.

Ella.
   O Dwina, Dwina! thou hast watch'd by me
   When on a sick-bed laid, and held my head,
   And kindly wept to see my wasted cheek,
   And lov'st thou cruelty? It cannot be!

Dwi.
   No, foolish maiden! mercy to such fiends
   Were cruelty.

Ella.
   Such fiends! Alas! do not they look like men?
   Do they not to their needful brethren do
   The kindly deeds of men? Yea, Ethelbert
   Within his halls a houseless Thane maintain'd,
   Whose substance had been spent in base attempts
   To work his ruin.

Dwi.
   The blackest fiends of all most saintly forms
   Oft wear. Go, go! thou strangely art deluded,
   I tremble for thee! get thee hence and pray,
   If that the wicked pity of thy heart
   May be forgiven thee.


Enter a Lady eagerly.
Lady.
   Come, damsels, come! along the gallery,
   In slow procession holy Hexulf walks,
   With saintly Woggarwolfe, a fierce chief once,
   But now a cowled priest of marv'llous grace.
   They bear some holy relies to the queen;
   Which, near the royal couch with blessings laid,
   Will to the king his wonted rest restore.
   Come, meet them on their way and gain a blessing.

Dwi.
   We will all gladly go.


 Exeunt.


 
SCENE II.
A royal apartment, lighted only by the moon through the high arched windows. Enter Ethwald , as if just risen from bed, loose and disordered, but bearing a drawn sword in his hand.
Ethw.
   Still must this heavy closeness thus oppress me?
   Will no fresh stream of air breathe on my brow,
   And ruffle for a while this stilly gloom?
   O night, when good men rest, and infants sleep;
   Thou art to me no season of repose,
   But a fear'd time of waking more intense,
   Of life more keen, of misery more palpable!
   My rest must be when the broad sun doth glare;
   When armour rings and men walk to and fro;
   Like a tir'd hound stretch'd in the busy hall,
   I needs must lie; night will not cradle me.

 Looking up anxiously to the windows.
   What, looks the moon still through that lofty arch?
   Will't ne'er be morn?—If that again in strength
   I led mine army on the bold career
   So surely shapen in my fancy's eye,
   I might again have joy; but in these towers,
   Around, beneath me, hateful dungeons yawn,
   In every one of which some being lives
   To curse me. Ethelbert and Selred too,
   My father's son and my youth's oracle,
   Ye too are found with those, who raise to heav'n
   The prisoner's prayer against my hated head.
   I am a lofty tree of growth too great
   For its thin soil, from whose wide rooted fangs
   The very rocks and earth that foster'd it
   Sever and fall away.—I stand alone!
   I stand alone! I thought, alas! to spread
   My wide protecting boughs o'er my youth's friends;
   But they, like pois'nous brushwood at my root,
   Have chok'd my stately growth e'en more than all.

 Musing for some time gloomily.
   How marr'd and stinted hath my greatness been!
   What am I now of that which long ere now
   I hop'd to be? O! it doth make me mad
   To think of this! By hell it shall not be!
   I would cut off this arm and cast it from me
   For vultures' meat, if it did let or hinder
   Its nobler fellow.
   Yes, they shall die! I to my fortune's height
   Will rear my lofty head, and stand alone,
   Fearless of storm of tempest.

 Turns round his head upon hearing a noise, and seeing Elburga enter at the bottom of the stage, with a lamp in her hand, like one risen from bed, he starts back and gazes wildly upon her.
   What form is that? What art thou? Speak! speak quickly!
   If thou indeed be aught of living kind.

Elb.
   Why didst thou start? Dost thou not know me?

Ethw.
                                            No;
   Thy shadow seem'd to me a crested youth.

Elb.
   And with that trusty weapon in thy grasp,
   Which thou, of late, e'en on thy nightly couch
   Hast sheathless kept, fearest thou living man?

Ethw.
   It was not living man I fear'd.

Elb.
                                            What then?
   Last night when open burst your chamber door
   With the rude blast, which it is wont to do,
   You gaz'd upon it with such fearful looks
   Of fix'd expectancy, as one, in truth,
   Looks for the ent'ring of some dreadful thing.
   Have you seen aught?

Ethw.
   Get to thy couch. Thinkst thou I will be question'd?

Elb.

 putting her hand upon his shoulder soothingly .
   Nay, be not thus uncourtly! thou shalt tell me.

Ethw.

 shaking her off impatiently .
   Be not a fool! get thee to sleep, I say!
   What dost thou here?

Elb.
   That which, in truth, degrades my royal, birth,
   And therefore should be chid; servilely soothing
   The fretful moods of one, who, new to greatness,
   Feels its unwieldy robe sit on his shoulders
   Constrain'd and gallingly.

Ethw.

 going up to her sternly and grasping her by the wrist .
   Thou paltry trapping of my regal state,
   Which with its other baubles I have snatch'd,
   Dar'st thou to front me thus? Thy foolish pride,
   Like the mock loftiness of mimic greatness,
   Makes us contemned in the public eye,
   And my tight rule more hateful. Get thee hence;
   And be with hooded nuns a gorgeous saint,
   For know thou lackest meekness for a queen.


 Elb . seems much alarmed, but at the same time walks from him with great assumed haughtiness, and exit.
Ethw.

 alone .
   This woman racks me to the very pitch!
   Where I should look for gentle tenderness,
   There find I heartless pride. Ah! there was one
   Who would have sooth'd my troubles: there was one
   Who would have cheer'd—But wherefore think I now?

 Pausing thoughtfully. 
   Elburga has of late been to my will
   More pliant, oft assuming gentle looks:
   What may this mean? under this alter'd guise
   What treach'ry lurks?

 Pausing again for some time. 
   And yet it should not be:
   Her greatness must upon my fortune hang,
   And this she knows full well. I've chid her roughly.
   Some have, from habit and united interest,
   Amidst the wreck of other human ties,
   The steadfast duty of a wife retain'd,
   E'en where no early love or soft endearments


 
   The bands have knit. Yes; I have been too rough.

 Calling to her off the stage.
   Elburga! dost thou hear me, gentle wife?
   And thou com'st at my bidding: this is kindly.


Enter Elburga , humbled.
Elb.
   You have been stern, my lord. You think belike,
   That I have urged you in my zeal too far
   To give those rebel chieftains up to Hexulf,
   As best agreeing with the former ties
   That bound you to those base ungrateful men,
   And with the nature of their chiefest crime,
   Foul heresy; but, if in this I err,
   Zeal for your safety urged me to offend.

Ethw.
   I've been too stern with thee, but heed it not.
   And in that matter thou hast urged so strongly,
   But that I much mistrust his cruelty,
   I would resign those miserable men
   To Hexulf's vengeful arm; for much he does
   Public opinion guide, and e'en to us,
   If now provok'd, might prove a dang'rous foe.

Elb.
   Mistrust him not; he will by oath engage
   To use no torture.

Ethw.
   And yet methinks, Selred might still be saved.
   A holy man might well devise the means
   To save a brother.

Elb.
                                            He will think of it.
   Much do the soldiers the bold courage prize,
   And simple plainness of his honest mind;
   To slay him might be dangerous.

Ethw.
   Ha! is it so? They've praised him much of late?

Elb.
   Yes, he has grown into their favour greatly.

Ethw.
   The changeful fools! I do remember well
   They shouted loudly o'er his paltry gift,
   Because so simply giv'n, when my rich spoils
   Seem'd little priz'd. I like not this. 'Twere well
   He were remov'd. We will consider this.

Elb.
   Come to your chamber then.

Ethw.
   No, no! into that dark oppressive den
   Of horrid thoughts I'll not return.

Elb.
                                            Not so!
   I've trimm'd the smould'ring fire, and by your couch
   The holy things are laid: return and fear not.

Ethw.
   I thank thy kindness; I, indeed, have need
   Of holy things, if that a stained soul
   May kindred hold with such.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A vaulted prison. Hereulf, Selred , and three Thanes of their party, are discovered walking gloomily and silently up and down.
 st Th.

 to the d, who groans heavily .
   Ah! wherefore, noble partner, art thou thus?
   We all are brothers, equal in misfortune;
   Let us endure it nobly!

 d Th.
   Ay, so I would, but it o'ercometh me.
   E'en this same night, in my far distant home
   Fires blaze upon my towers, to guide my steps
   Through woody dells which I shall pass no more.
   E'en on this night I promis'd to return.

 st Th.
   Yet bear it up, and do not dash us thus;
   We all have pleasant homes as well as thou,
   To which I fear we shall no more return.

Sel.

 to d Thane, who advances from the bottom of the stage .
   What didst thou look at yonder? Where is Ethelbert?

 d Th.
   Within yon deep recess, upon his knees,
   Just now I saw him, and I turn'd aside,
   Knowing the modest nature of his worship.


Enter Ethelbert from the recess, slowly advancing from the bottom of the stage.
   But see, he comes, and on his noble front
   A smiling calmness rests, like one whose mind
   Hath high communion held with blessed souls.

Her.

 to Eth .
   Where has thou been, brave Ethelbert? Ah! now
   Full well I see; thy countenance declares.
   Didst thou remember us? A good man's prayers
   Will from the deepest dungeon climb heav'n's height,
   And bring a blessing down.

Eth.
   Ye all are men who with undaunted hearts
   Most nobly have contended for the right.
   Your recompense is sure; ye shall be bless'd.

 d Th.
   How bless'd? With what assurance of the mind
   Hast thou pray'd for us? Tell us truly, Ethelbert;
   As those about to die, or those who yet
   Shall for a term this earthly state retain?
   Such strong impress'd ideas oft foreshow
   Th' event to follow.

Eth.
   Man, ever eager to foresee his doom
   With such conceits his fancy fondly flatters,
   And I too much have given my mind to this;
   But let us now, like soldiers on the watch
   Put our soul's armour on, alike prepared
   For all a soldier's warfare brings. In heav'n
   He sits, who on the inward war of souls
   Looks down, as one beholds a well-fought field,
   And nobly will reward the brave man's struggle.

 Raising his clasped hands fervently.
   O let Him now behold what His weak creatures,
   With many cares and fears of nature weak,
   Firmly relying on His righteous rule,
   Will suffer cheerfully! Be ye prepared!

Her.
   We are prepared: what say ye, noble colleagues?

 st Th.
   If that I here a bloody death must meet,


 
   And in some nook unbless'd, far from the tombs
   Of all mine honour'd race, these bones be laid,
   I do submit me to the will of heaven.

 d Th.
   E'en so do I in deep submission bow.

 d Th.
   If that no more within my op'ning gates
   My children and my wife shall e'er again
   Greet my return, or this chill'd frame again
   E'er feel the kindly warmth of home, so be it!
   His blessed will be done who ruleth all!

Her.
   If these nerv'd arms, full in the strength of youth,
   Must rot in the earth, and all my glorious hopes
   To free this land, with which high beat this heart,
   Must be cut off i' the midst, I bow my spirit
   To its Almighty Lord; I murmur not.
   Yet, O that it had been permitted me
   To have contended in that noble cause!
   Low must I sleep in an unnoted grave,
   While the oppressor of my native country
   Riots in brave men's blood!

Eth.
   Peace, noble boy! he will not riot long.
   They shall arise, who for that noble cause,
   With better fortune, not with firmer hearts
   Than we to the work have yoked, will bravely strive.
   To future heroes shall our names be known;
   And in our graves of turf we shall be bless'd.

Her.
   Well then, I'm satisfied: I'll smile in death;
   Yea, proudly will I smile! it wounds me not.

Eth.
   How, Selred? thou alone art silent here:
   To heaven's high will what off'ring makest thou?

Sel.
   Nothing, good Ethelbert. What can a man,
   Little enriched with the mind's rare treasure,
   And of th' unrighteous turmoil of this world
   Right weary grown, to his great Maker offer?
   Yet I can die as meekly as ye will,
   Albeit of His regard it is unworthy.

Eth.
   Give me thy hand, brave man! Well hast thou said!
   In truth thy off'ring far outprizes all;
   Rich in humility. Come, valiant friends;
   It makes my breast beat high to see you thus
   For Fortune's worst prepar'd with quiet minds.
   I'll sit me down awhile; come, gather round me,
   And for a little space the time beguile
   With the free use and interchange of thought:
   Of that which no stern tyrant can control.


 They all sit down on the ground.
Her.

 to Eth .
   Nay, on my folded mantle do thou sit.

Eth.
   I thank thee, but I feel no cold. My children!
   We do but want, methinks, a blazing fire,
   To make us thus a friendly chosen circle
   For converse met. Then we belike would talk
   Of sprites, and magic power, and marv'llous things,
   That shorten weary hours; now let us talk
   Of things that do th' inquiring mind of man
   With nobler wonder fill; that state unseen,
   With all its varied mansions of delight,
   To which the virtuous go, when like a dream
   Struck by the beams of op'ning day, this life,
   With all its shadowy forms, fades into nothing.

 st Th.
   Ay, Ethelbert, thou'rt full of sacred lore;
   Talk thou of this, and we will gladly heart thee.
   How thinkst thou we shall feel, when, like a nestling
   Burst from its shell, we wake to this new day?

Eth.
   Why e'en, methinks, like to the very thing
   To which, good Thane, thou hast compared us;
   For here we are but nestlings, and I trow,
   Pent up i' the dark we are. When that shall open
   Which human eye hath ne'er beheld, nor mind
   To human body linked, hath e'er conceiv'd,
   Grand, awful, lovely:—O! what form of words
   Will body out my thoughts!—I'll hold my peace.

 Covers his head with his hand and is silent for a moment.
   Then like a guised band, that for awhile
   Has mimick'd forth a sad and gloomy tale,
   We shall these worthless weeds of flesh cast off,
   And be the children of our Father's house.

Her.

 eagerly .
   But what sayst thou of those who doff these weeds
   To clothe themselves in flames and endless woe?

Eth.
   Peace to thee! what have we to do with this?
   Let it be veil'd in night!

Her.
                                            Nay, nay, good Ethelbert!
   I fain would know what foul oppression earns;
   And please my fancy with the after-doom
   Of tyrants, such as he beneath whose fangs
   Our wretched country bleeds. They shall be cursed:
   O say how deeply!

Eth.
   Hereulf, the spirit of Him thou call'st thy master,
   Who died for guilty men, breathes not in thee.
   Dost thou rejoice that aught of human kind
   Shall be accursed?

Her.

 starting up .
   If not within the fiery gulf of woe
   His doom be cast, there is no power above!

Eth.
   For shame, young man! this ill beseems thy state:
   Sit down and I will tell thee of this Ethwald.

Sel.

 rising up greatly agitated .
   O no! I pray thee do not talk of him!
   The blood of Mollo has been Mercia's curse.

Eth.
   Sit down; I crave it of you both; sit down
   And wear within your breasts a manlier spirit.

 Pointing to Her . to sit close by him.
   Nay here, my son, and let me take thy hand.


 
   Thus by my side, in his fair op'ning youth,
   Full oft has Ethwald sat and heard me talk,
   With, as I well believe, a heart inclined,
   Though somewhat dash'd with shades of darker hue,
   To truth and kindly deeds.
   But from this mixed seed of good and ill
   One baleful plant in dark strength rais'd its head,
   O'ertopping all the rest; which fav'ring circumstance
   Did feed and strengthen to a growth so monstrous,
   That underneath its wide and noxious shade
   Died all the native plants of feebler stem.
   O I have wept for him, as I have lain
   On my still midnight couch! I tried to save him,
   But ev'ry means against its end recoil'd.
   Good Selred, thou rememb'rest well that night
   When to the female Druid's awful cave
   I led thy brother.

Sel.
                                            I remember well.

All the Thanes

 speaking at once, eagerly. 
   Ay, what of that? We've heard strange tales of it.

Eth.
   At my request the Arch Sister there receiv'd him:
   And though she promis'd me she would unfold
   Such things as might a bold ambitious mind
   Scare from its wishes, she, unweetingly,
   Did but the more inflame them.

Her.
                                            Ha! what sayst thou?
   Did she not show the form of things to come
   By fix'd decrees, unsubject to her will?

Eth.
   She show'd him things, indeed, most wonderful;
   Whether by human arts to us unknown,
   Or magic, or the aid of powerful spirits
   Call'd forth, I wot not. Hark! I hear a noise.

 st Th.
   I hear without the tread of many feet.
   They pull our dungeon's bars: ha, see who come!
   Wear they not ruffians brows?

 d Th.
   And follow'd still by more: a num'rous crew.
   What is their business here?


 Enter a band of armed men, accompanied by two priests, and carrying with them a block, an axe, and a large sheet or curtain, &c.
Eth.
   Do not the axe and block borne by those slaves
   Tell thee their errand? But we'll face them bravely.
   They do not come upon us unawares:
   We are prepar'd.—Let us take hands, my friends!
   Let us united stand, a worthy band
   Of girded trav'llers, ready to depart
   Unto a land unknown, but yet undreaded.


 They all take hands, facing about, and waiting the approach of the men with a steady countenance.
 st priest.
   Why look you on us thus with lowering brows?
   Can linked hands the keen-edg'd steel resist?

Her.
   No, priest, but linked hearts can bid defiance
   To the barb'd lightning, if so arm'd withal
   Thou didst encounter us. Quick do thine office!
   Here six brave heads abide thee, who ne'er yet
   Have meanly bow'd themselves to living wight.

 st priest.
   You are too forward, youth: less will suffice:
   One of those guilty heads beneath our axe
   Must fall, the rest shall live. So wills our chief.
   Lots shall decide our victim: in this urn
   Inclosed are your fates.

 Setting down an urn in the middle of the stage upon a small tripod or stand, whilst the chiefs instantly let go hands, and stand gazing upon one another.
   Ha! have I then so suddenly unlink'd you?

 With a malicious smile.
   Put forth your hands, brave chiefs; put forth your hands;
   And he who draws the sable lot of death,
   Full speedy be his doom!

 A long pause: the chiefs still look upon one another, none of them offering to step forward to the urn.
   What pause ye thus, indeed? This hateful urn
   Doth but one death contain, and many lives,
   And shrink ye from it, brave and valiant Thanes?
   Then lots shall first be cast, who foremost shall
   Thrust in his hand into this vase of terrors.

Eth.

 stepping forth .
   No, thou rude servant of a gentle master,
   Doing disgrace to thy much honour'd garb,
   This shall not be: I am the eldest chief,
   And I of right should stand the foremost here.

 Putting his hand into the urn
   What heaven appoints me, welcome!

Sel.

 putting in his hand .
   I am the next: heav'n send me what it lists!

 st Th.

 putting in his hand .
   Here also let me take. If that the race
   Of noble Cormac shall be sunk in night,
   How small a thing determines!

 d Th.

 putting in his hand .
   On which shall fix my grasp?
 hesitating 
or this? or this?
   No, cursed thing! whate'er thou art, I'll have thee.

 d Th.

 putting out his hand with purturbation, misses the narrow mouth of the urn .
   I wist not how it is: where is its mouth?

 st priest.
   Direct thy hand more steadily, good Thane,
   And fear not thou wilt miss it.

 To Hereulf .
   Now, youthful chief, one lot remains for thee.


 Hereulf pauses for a moment, and his countenance betrays perturbation, when Ethelbert steps forth again.
Eth.
   No, this young chieftain's lot belongs to me;


 
   He shall not draw.

 Putting in his hand quickly and taking out the last lot.
   Now, priest, the lots are finish'd.

 st priest.
   Well, open then your fates.


 They each open their lots, whilst Hereulf stands looking eagerly in their faces as they open them.
 d Th.

 opening his, and then holding up his hands in ecstasy .
   Wife, children, home! I am a living man!

 st Th.

 having opened his .
   I number still with those who breathe the air,
   And look upon the light! blest heaven so wills it.

 d Th.

 looking at his joyfully .
   Fate is with me! the race of Cormac lives!

Her.

 after looking anxiously first upon Ethelbert and then upon Selred .
   Selred, what is thy lot? is it not dark?

Sel.
   No, Hereulf.

Her.
   Oh, Ethelbert! thou smilest on me! alas!
   It is a dismal smile! thou art the victim!
   Thou shalt not die: the lot of right is mine.
   A shade of human weakness cross'd my soul,
   Such as before, not in the horrid fields
   Of crimson slaughter did I ever feel;
   But it is past; now I can bravely die,
   And I will have my right.

Eth.

 pushing him affectionately away .
   Away, my son! It is as it should be.

Her.
   O if thou wilt entreat me as a man,
   Nor slur me with contempt! I do beseech thee
   Upon my bended knee!
 Kneeling. 
O if thou diest,
   I of all living things most wretched am!

Eth.
   Be temperate, my son! thou art reserv'd
   For what the fervid strength of active youth
   Can best perform. O take him from me, friends!

 The Thanes take Hereulf forcibly from clinging round Ethelbert , and he then assumes a softened solemnity.
   Now, my brave friends, we have together fought
   A noble warfare; I am call'd away!
   Let me in kind and true affection leave you.

Thanes

 speaking together .
   Alas, thou art our father and our friend!
   Alas, that thou shouldst meet this dismal end!

Eth.
   Ay, true indeed, it is a dismal end
   To mortal feeling; yet within my breast
   Blest hope and love, and heav'nward confidence,
   With human frailty so combined are,
   That I do feel a wild and trembling pleasure.
   E'en on this awful verge, methinks I go,
   Like a chid infant, from his passing term
   Of short disgrace, back to his father's presence.

 Holding up his hands with a dignified exultation.
   I feel an awful joy!—Farewell, my friends!
   Selred, we've fought in many a field together,
   And still as brothers been; take thou, I pray,
   This token of my love. And thou, good Wolfere,
   I've ever priz'd thy worth, wear thou this ring.

 To the two other chiefs, giving them also tokens. 
   And you, brave chiefs, I've ever loved you both.
   And now, my noble Hereulf,
   Of all the youth to whom my soul e'er knit,
   As with a parent's love, in the good cause,
   Thee have I found most fervent and most firm;
   Be thine my sword, which in my native hall
   Hung o'er my noble father's arms thou'lt find,
   And be it in thy hands what well thou knowst
   It would have been in mine. Farewell, my friends!
   God bless you all!


 They all crowd about him, some kissing his hands, some taking hold of his clothes, except Hereulf , who, starting away from him, throws himself upon the ground in an agony of grief. Ethelbert lifts up his eyes and his hands as if he were uttering a blessing over them.
 st priest.
   This may not be! down with those impious hands!
   Dar'st thou, foul heretic, before the face
   Of hallow'd men, thus mutter prayers accurst?

Eth.
   Doth this offend you?—O it makes me feel
   A spirit for this awful hour unmeet,
   When I do think on you, ye hypocrites!

 st priest.
   Come, come! we waste our time, the headsman waits.

 To Eth .
   Prepare thee for the block.

Eth.
   And will you in the sight of these my friends
   Your bloody task perform? Let them retire.

 st priest.
   Nay, nay, that may not be, our pious Hexulf
   Has given his orders.

 d priest.
                                            O be not so cruel!
   Though he has ordered so, yet, ne'ertheless,
   We may suspend this veil, and from their eyes
   The horrid sight conceal.

 st priest.
   Then be it so; I grant it.


 A large cloth or curtain is suspended upon the points of two spears, held up by spearmen, concealing the block and executioner, &c. from the Thanes.
st priest

 to the men behind the curtain, after a pause .
   Are ye ready?

 Voices behind. 
                                            Yes, we are ready now.

st priest

 To Eth ..
   And thou?

Eth.
   God be my strength! I'm ready also.

 As the priest is leading Ethelbert behind the curtain, he turns about to give a last look to his friends; and they, laying their hands devoutly upon their breasts, bow to him very low. They then go behind the curtain, leaving the Thanes on the front of the stage, who stand fixed in silent and horrid expectation; except Selred , who sits down upon the ground with his face hid between his knees, and Hereulf , who, rising suddenly from the ground, looks wildly round, and seeing Ethelbert gone,

 
throws himself down again in all the distraction of grief and despair.
A voice behind

 after some noise and bustle of preparation has been heard .
   Now doff his garment, and undo his vest.
   Fie on it, there! assist the prisoner.

 d voice.
   Let some one hold his hands.

 d voice.
   Do ye that office.

 A pause of some length.
Voice again.
   Headsman, let fall thy blow, he gives the sign.


 The axe is seen lifted up above the curtain, and the sound of the stroke is heard.
Thanes

 shrinking involuntarily. and all speaking at once .
   The stroke of death is given!


 The spearmen let fall the curtain, and the body of Ethelbert is discovered upon the ground, with a cloth over it; whilst his head is held up by the executioner, but seen very indistinctly through the spears and pikes of the surrounding soldiers. The Thanes start back and avert their faces.
 st priest.

 coming forward .
   Rebellious Thanes, ye see a deed of justice.
   Here rest ye, and another day of life
   Enjoy together: at this hour to-morrow
   We'll visit you, and then, by lot determin'd,
   Another head must fall. So wills the king.

 st Th.
   What words are these?

 d Th.
   Do thine ears catch their sense?

 d Th.
   I cannot tell thee; mine confus'dly sound.

 st priest

 raising his voice louder .
   To-morrow at this hour we'll visit you.
   And here again, selected by the lot,
   Another head must fall. Till then, farewell!
   Another day of life enjoy securely:
   Much happiness be with you.


 An involuntary groan bursts from the Thanes, and Hereulf , starting furiously from the ground, clenches his hands in a menacing posture as the priests and spearmen, &c. retire. The scene closes. 
ACT V SCENE I.
An open space on the walls of the castle. Enter Alwy and Hexulf , talking as they enter with violent gesture.
Hex.
   Escap'd, sayst thou, with all the rebel chiefs?
   Hereulf escap'd? th' arch fiend himself hath done it,
   If what thou sayst be true.—It is impossible.
   Sayst thou they are escap'd?

Alwy.
                                            In very truth they are.

Hex.
   Then damned treachery has aided them!

Alwy.
   Nay, rather say, thy artful cruelty
   Arm'd them with that which to the weakly frame
   Lends a nerved giant's strength, despair. From out
   The thick and massy wall, now somewhat loose
   And jagged grown with time, cemented heaps,
   Which scarce two teams of oxen could have mov'd,
   They've torn, and found a passage to the moat.
   What did it signify in what dire form
   Death frown'd upon them, so as they had died?

Hex.
   Who can foresee events? As well as thou
   I would that one swift stroke had slain them all
   Rather than this had been. But Ethelbert
   And Selred are secur'd. Was it not Selred
   Who on the second night our victim fell?

Alwy.
   It was, but better had it been for us
   Had they been left alive: had they been still
   In their own castles unmolested left.
   For like a wounded serpent, who, aloft,
   The surgy volumes of his mangled length
   In agony the more terrific rears
   Against his enemy, this maimed compact
   Will from thy stroke but the more fiercely rise,
   Now fiery Hereulf is their daring leader.
   And what have we to look for?

Hex.
   Dire, bloody vengeance.—O some damned traitor
   Hath done this work! it could not else have been!

Alwy.
   Well, do thou find him out then, if thou canst,
   And let thy vengeance fall where lies the sin.

Hex.
   Doth the king know of this?

Alwy.
                                            He doth not yet.

Hex.
   Then must he be inform'd without delay.

Alwy.
   As quickly as you please, if that you please
   To take that office on yourself, good father;
   But as for me, I must right plainly say
   I will not venture it: no, faith! of late
   The frame and temper of King Ethwald's mind
   Is chang'd. He ever was in former times
   Cheerful, collected, sanguine; for all turns
   Of fate prepar'd, like a fair ample lake,
   Whose breast receives the azure hue of heaven,
   And sparkles gaily in the breezy noon:
   But now, like a swoln flood, whose course has been
   O'er rude opposing rocks and rugged shelves;
   Whose turbid waters wear the sullen shade
   Of dark o'erhanging banks, and all enchaf'd
   Round ev'ry little pebble fiercely roars,


 
   Boiling in foamy circles, his chaf'd spirit
   Can bear th' encounter of no adverse thing
   To his stern will oppos'd. I may not tell him.

Hex.
   Be not so fearful! art thou not a man
   Us'd to the sudden turns of great men's humours?
   Thou best can do it, Alwy.


 Soothingly. 
Alwy.
   Nay, father, better will it suit your age
   And rev'rend state. And he has need, I ween,
   Of ghostly counsel too; night after night
   He rises from his tossing sleepless couch,
   Oft wildly staring round the vacant chamber,
   As if his fancy peopled the dark void
   With horrid shapes. The queen hath told me this.
   Come, look to it, for something must be done.

Hex.
   I will accompany your homeward steps,
   Whilst we consider of it.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A royal apartment, and a servant discovered busily employed in lighting it up. Enter to him another servant.
 d serv.
   Wilt thou ne'er finish lighting these grim walls?
   Will not those lamps suffice?

 st serv.
   No, by my faith, we want as many more;
   For still, thou seest, that pillar'd corner's dark,

 Pointing to a gloomy recess on the other side of the stage.
   Wherein the eye of conscience-scared folks
   Might fearful things espy. I am commanded
   To lighten each apartment of this tower
   To noon-day pitch.

 d serv.
   Ay, Uthbert, these are fearful, bloody times!
   Ethwald, God knows, has on his conscience laid
   A weight of cruel deeds: the executioner
   Works for him now in the grim holds of death,
   Instead of armed warriors in the field;
   And now men steal abroad in twilight's gloom,
   To talk of fearful things, not by the blaze
   Of cheerful fires, in peaceful cottage, heap'd
   With sparkling faggots from the winter store.

 st serv.
   Ay, thou sayst well; it is a fearful time;
   No marvel Ethwald should not love the dark
   In which his fancy shapes all fearful things.

 d serv.
   What, dost thou think it is his fancy's shapes
   He looks upon? No, no: believe me, friend,
   Night and the darkness are inhabited
   By those who move near neighbours to the living;
   Close by their very sides, yet unperceiv'd
   By all, but those whose eyes unveiled are
   By heavenly power, in mercy or in wrath.
   Such proofs of this I've heard.—Last night thou knowst
   The royal grooms who near their master sleep,
   In the adjoining chamber much were scar'd
   With fearful sounds.

 st serv.
   I know it not.—Who was it told it thee?
   At midnight was it?


 Eagerly. 
 d serv.
   Yes, come with me to Baldwick, he will tell thee;
   He heard it all: thou wilt return in time
   To finish, here, thy task. We'll have a horn
   Of foaming ale, and thou shalt hear it all.
   Good foaming ale: ay, mercy on us all'
   We live in fearful times!


 Listening. 
 st serv.

 listening also .
   What shall I do?
   I hear the king a speaking angrily,
   And coming hitherward. What shall I do?
   Shall I remain and face him? nay, good faith!
   I'll shun the storm; he is engag'd, perchance,
   Too much to notice my unfinish'd task.


 Exeunt hastily.

Enter Ethwald , talking angrily to a noble Thane.
Ethw.
   Nay, nay, these are excuses, noble Edmar,
   Not reasons; all our northern troops ere now
   Might well have been in readiness. 'Tis plain
   Such backward sloth from disaffection springs.
   Look to it well:—if with the waning moon,
   He and his vassals have not join'd our standard,
   I'll hold him as a traitor.

Th.
   My royal lord, be not so wrathful with him,
   Nor let your noble mind to dark suspicion
   So quickly yield. This is the season still,
   When unbraced warriors on the rushy floor
   Stretch them in pleasing sloth; list'ning to tales
   Of ancient crones, or merry harpers' lays,
   And batt'ning on the housewife's gusty cheer:
   Spring has not yet so temper'd the chill sky
   That men will change their warm and shelt'ring roofs
   For its cold canopy.

Ethw.
   O foul befall their gluttony and sloth!
   Fie on't! there is no season to the brave
   For war unfit. With this moon's waning light
   I will, with those who dare their king to follow,
   My northern march begin.

Th.
                                            Then, faith, my lord,
   I much suspect your army will be small:
   And what advantage may you well expect
   From all this haste? E'en three weeks later, still
   You will surprise the foe, but ill prepar'd
   To oppose invasion. Do then, gracious king,
   Listen to friendly counsel, and the while,
   Within these walls, where ev'ry pleasure courts you,
   Like a magnificent and royal king,
   Your princely home enjoy.

Ethw.
   Out on it, man, thou knowst not what thou sayst!
   Home hath he none who once becomes a king!
   Behind the pillar'd masses of his halls


 
   The dagger'd traitor lurks; his vaulted roofs
   Do nightly echo to the whisper'd vows
   Of those who curse him; at his costly board
   With grinning smile the damned pois'ner sits;
   Yea, e'en the void recesses of his chamber,
   Void though they be unto all eyes but his,
   Are peopled—


 Stopping short.
Th.

 eagerly .
   Good my lord! what do you mean?

Ethw.
   In the confusion of tumultuous war,
   'Midst the terrific shouts of closing foes,
   And trampling steeds, and din of bick'ring arms;
   Where dying warriors groan unheard, and things
   Horrid to nature are as though they were not,
   Unwail'd, unheeded:
   Where the rough chance of each contentious day
   Blots out all irksome mem'ry of the past,
   All fear of that to follow: where like herds,
   Of savage beasts, on the bleak mountain's side,
   Drench'd with the rain, the weary warriors lie,
   Whilst nightly tempests howling o'er their heads
   Lull them to rest; there is my home, good Thane.

Th.
   No marvel, then, my lord, if to the field
   You turn your eager thoughts! I only fear
   Your royal arms will in Northumberland
   Find no contention worthy of their force;
   For rumour says, the northern prince is gone
   With his best troops against the Scottish king.

Ethw.
   If this be true, it is unto my fortune
   Most fair occasion; master of the north
   I soon shall be, and on the west again
   Pour like a torrent big with gather'd strength.
   Who told thee this? it breaks upon me, friend,
   Like bright'ning sunbeams thwart a low'ring sky.

Th.
   A northern villain brought to me the tale,
   And told with circumstances of good credit.

Ethw.
   Run thou and find him out; I'll wait thee here;
   I must have more assurance of this matter.
   Quickly, my worthy Edmar!
 Exit Thane.

 Alone. 

   If that this rumour bear a true report,
   Th' opposing rocks on which my rising tide
   So long has beat, before me now give way,
   And through the beach my onward waves shall roll
   To the wide limits of their destin'd reach.
   Full day, although tempestuous it may prove,
   Now breaks on me! now come the glorious height,
   And the proud front, and the full grasp of power!
   Fly, gloomy thoughts, and hideous fantasies,
   Back to the sprites that sent you! England's king
   Behind him casts the fears of Mercia's lord.
   The north subdued, then stretching to the west
   My growing strength—

 Stretching out his arms in the vehemence of action, he turns himself round, directly facing the gloomy recess on the opposite side of the stage.
   Ha! doth some gloomy void still yawn before me,
   In fearful shade?

 Turning his eyes away hastily from it.
   No; I saw nothing: shall I thus be moved
   With ev'ry murky nook? I'll look again.

 Steals a fearful look to the recess, and then starting back, turns away from it with horror.
   O they're all there again! and ev'ry phantom
   Mark'd with its grisly wounds, e'en as before.
   Ho! who waits there? Hugon! I say, ho, Hugon!
   Come to me! quickly come!


Enter a Groom of his chamber.
Groom.
   Save you, my royal lord! What is your pleasure?
   Are you in pain? Your voice did sound, methought,
   With strange unnatural strength.

Ethw.
                                            Bring me lights here.

Groom.
   A hundred lamps would scarce suffice, I ween,
   To light this spacious chamber.

Ethw.
   Then let a thousand do it; must I still
   In ev'ry shady corner of my house
   See hideous—quickly go, and do my bidding.
   Why star'st thou round thee thus? Dost thou see aught?

Groom.
   No, nothing.


 Looking round fearfully.
Ethw.
   Thou needst not look; 'tis nothing; fancy oft
   Deceives the eye with strange and flitting things.
   Regard it not, but quickly bring more lamps

Groom.
   Nay, good my lord, shall I remain with you,
   And call my fellow?

Ethw.

 angrily .
   Do as thou art commanded.

 Exit groom.
   This man perceives the weakness of my mind.
   Am I, indeed, the warlike king of Mercia?

 Re-enter two grooms with lamps, which they place in the recess. Ethwald , not venturing to look on it again till the lights are placed, now turns round to it, and seems relieved.
   Ye have done well.

 After a pause, in which he walks several times across the stage, stopping short, and seeing the grooms still there.
   Why do ye linger here? I want ye not.
   Begone.

 Exeunt grooms.
   But that I would not to those fools
   Betray the shameful secret of my mind,
   I fain would call them back.
   What are these horrors?
   A fearful visitation of a time
   That will o'erpass? O might I so believe it!
   Edmar, methinks, ere this might be return'd:
   I'll wait for him no more: I'll go myself
   And meet him.

 Going towards the large arched door by which he entered, he starts back from it with horror.
   Ha! they are there again!
   E'en in the very door-way do they front me!
   Still foremost Ethelbert and Selred tower


 
   With their new-sever'd necks, and fix on me
   Their death-strain'd eye-balls: and behind them frowns
   The murder'd youth, and Oswal's scepter'd ghost:
   While seen, as if half-fading into air,
   The pale distracted maid shows her faint form.
   Thrice in this very form and order seen
   They have before me stood. What may it mean?
   I've heard that shapes like these will to the utterance
   Of human voice give back articulate sound,
   And having been adjured so, depart.

 Stretching out both his hands, and clenching them resolutely.
   I'll do it, though behind them hell should yawn,
   With all its unveil'd horrors.

 Turning again to the doorway with awful solemnity.
   If aught ye be but flitting fantasies,
   But empty semblance of the form ye wear;
   If aught ye be that can to human voice
   Real audience give, and a real sense receive
   Of that on which your fix'd and hollow eyes
   So stern and fix'dly glare; I do conjure you
   Depart from me, and come again no more!
   From me depart! Full well those ghastly wounds
   Have been return'd into this tortur'd breast:
   O drive me not unto the horrid brink
   Of dire distraction!
   Speak, Ethelbert! O speak, if voice thou hast!
   Tell me what sacrifice can soothe your spirits;
   Can still the unquiet sleepers of the grave:
   For this most horrid visitation is
   Beyond endurance of the boldest mind,
   In flesh and blood enrob'd.—It takes no heed,
   But fix'dly glares upon me as before.
   I speak to empty air: it can be nothing.
   Is it not some delusion of the eyes?

 Rubbing his eyes very hard, and rousing himself.
   Ah! still the hideous semblance is before me,
   Plain as at first. I cannot suffer this!

 Runs to the lamps, and taking one in each hand, rushes forward in despair to the doorway.
   They are all gone! Before the searching light
   Resolv'd to nothing!


Enter Hexulf and Alwy .
Ethw.

 turning hastily upon hearing them enter behind him .
   Ha! is it you? Most happily you come!
   Welcome you are, most welcome!

Alwy.
   Thanks to you, good my lord! but on my life
   This holy bishop and myself are come,
   Unwillingly, with most untoward tidings.

Ethw.
   Well, use not many words: what now befalls?

Hex.
   The rebel Hereulf and his thralled mates
   Have, with more strength than human hands may own,
   For that the holy church—

Ethw.
   Well, well, what meanest thou?
   And what should follow this?

Alwy.
   They've brok'n their prison walls and are escap'd.

Ethw.
   I am glad on't! be it so! in faith I'm glad!
   We have shed blood enough.

Alwy.
   Nay, but my lord, unto their towers of strength
   They will return; where bruiting abroad
   Their piteous tale, as 'nighted travellers
   To the false plainings of some water fiend,
   All men will turn to them; nor can your troops
   In safety now begin their northern march
   With such fell foes behind them.

Ethw.

 roused .
   Ay, thou sayst true; it is a damned let!
   Here falls another rock to bar my way.
   But I will on! Come, let us instantly
   Set out, and foil them ere they gather strength.

Alwy.
   This would be well, but that within these walls
   Some of their faithful friends are still confin'd,
   Who in our absence might disturbance breed,
   As but a feeble guard can now be spar'd
   To hold the castle. How shall this be settled?
   Shall we confine them in the stronger vaults?

Ethw.

 fiercely .
   No, no! I'll have no more imprisonments!
   Let them be slain; yea all: even to a man!
   This is no time for weak uncertain deeds.
   Saw you not Edmar as you hither came?

Alwy.
   We saw him with a stranger much engaged,
   By a faint lamp, near to the eastern tower.

Ethw.
   Then follow me, and let us find him out.

Hex.
   We follow you, my lord.

Ethw.

 as he is about to go out, turning hastily round to Alwy .
   Bear thou a light.
   My house is like a faintly mooned cave,
   And hateful shadows cross each murky aisle.


 Exeunt , Alwy bearing a light.
SCENE III.
The evening: a wood with a view of Ethwald ' s castle seen through the trees. Enter Hereulf disguised like a country hind: enter to him, by another path, a Thane, disguised also.
Her.
   Welcome, my friend! art thou the first to join me?
   This as I guess should be th' appointed time:
   For o'er our heads have passed on homeward wing
   Dark flights of rooks and daws and flocking birds,


 
   Wheeling aloft with wild dissonant screams;
   And from each hollow glen and river's bed
   The white mist slowly steals in fleecy wreaths
   Up the dark wooded banks. And yet, methinks,
   The deeper shades of ev'ning come not after,
   As they are wont, but day is lengthen'd out
   Most strangely.

Th.
   Seest thou those paly streams of shiv'ring light
   So widely spread along the northern sky?
   They to the twilight grey that brightness lend
   At which thou wonderest. Look up, I pray thee!

Her.

 turning and looking up .
   What may it mean? it is a beauteous light.

Th.
   In truth I know not. Many a time have I
   On hill and heath beheld the changeful face
   Of awful night; I've seen the moving stars
   Shoot rapidly athwart the sombre sky,
   Red fiery meteors in the welkin blaze,
   And sheeted lightnings gleam, but ne'er before
   Saw I a sight like this. It is, belike,
   Some sign portentous of our coming fate:
   Had we not better pause and con awhile
   This daring scene, ere yet it be too late?

Her.
   No, by this brave man's sword! not for an hour
   Will I the glorious vengeful deed delay,
   Though heav'n's high dome were flaming o'er my head,
   And earth beneath me shook. If it be aught
   Portentous, it must come from higher powers:
   For demons ride but on the lower clouds,
   Or raise their whirlwinds in the nether air.
   All blessed spirits still must favour those
   Who war on virtue's side: therefore, I say,
   Let us march boldly to the glorious work:
   It is a sign foretelling Ethwald's fall.
   Now for our valiant friends; they must be near.
   Ho! holla, ho!

 Enter by different paths in the wood, the other chiefs, disguised, and gather round Hereulf , he receiving them joyfully.
   Welcome! all welcome! you good Thane, and you,
   And ev'ry valiant soul, together leagued
   In this bold enterprise. Well are we met.
   So far we prosper; and my glowing heart
   Tells me our daring shall be nobly crown'd.
   Now move we cheerly on our way: behold
   Those frowning towers, where, ere the morning watch,
   That shall be done, for which, e'en in our graves,
   Full many a gen'rous Mercian, yet unborn,
   Shall bless our honour'd names.

Chiefs

 speaking all together .
   We follow you, brave Hereulf.

st chief.
   Ay, with true heart, or good or ill betide,
   We'll follow you.

Her.
   Come on! ere this, with fifty chosen men,
   Our trusty colleague, near the northern gate,
   Attends our signal. Come, ye gen'rous few;
   Ye who have groan'd in the foul dungeon's gloom,
   Whose gen'rous bosoms have indignant heav'd
   To see free men beneath th' oppressor's yoke
   Like base-born villains press'd! Now comes the hour
   Of virtuous vengeance: on our side in secret
   Beats ev'ry Mercian heart: the tyrant now
   Trusts not to men: nightly within his chamber
   The watch-dog guards his couch, the only friend
   He now dare trust, but shall not guard it long.
   Follow my steps, and do the gen'rous deeds
   Of valiant freemen: heaven is on our side.


 Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
An open space within the walls of the castle, fronting one of the gates: the stage darkened, and the sky lighted up with the aurora borealis, very bright. Enter by opposite sides two Officers of the castle.
 st off.
   Ha! is it thou, my friend?
   Thou'st left thy post, I guess, as well as I,
   To view this awful sky. Look over head,
   Where like a mighty dome, from whose bright centre
   Shoot forth those quiv'ring rays of vivid light,
   Moving with rapid change on every side,
   Swifter than flitting thought, the heavens appear!
   While o'er the west in paler brightness gleam
   Full many a widely undulating tide
   Of silver light: and the dark low'ring east,
   Like to a bloody mantle stretched out,
   Seems to conceal behind its awful shade
   Some dread commotion of the heavenly powers,
   Soon to break forth—some grand and unknown thing.

 d off.
   It is an awful sight! what may it mean?
   Doth it not woes and bloody strife foretell?
   I've heard my father talk of things like this.—
   When the king's passing sickness shall be gone,
   Which has detain'd him from his purpos'd march
   Against the rebel chiefs, doubt not, my friend,
   We shall have bloody work.

 st off.
   Ay, but ere that, mayhap, the man of blood
   May bleed; and Mercia from the tyrant's grasp—

 d off.
   Hush, hush! thou art unwise: some list'ning ear—

 st off.
   And if there should, what danger? all men now
   Harbour such secret thoughts; and those who once
   His youthful valour lov'd and warlike feats,
   Now loathe his cruelty. I'll tell thee something—


 Drawing nearer him mysteriously.


 
 d off.

 frightened .
   Hush, hush! I will not hear thee! hold thy tongue!
   What will't avail, when on the bloody stake
   Thy head is fix'd, that all men think as thou dost:
   And he who fix'd thy cruel doom to-day
   Shall die to-morrow?

 st off.
   I'm mute, my friend: and now I plainly see
   How he may lord it o'er a prostrate land,
   Who trembles in his iron tower the while,
   With but a surly mastiff for his friend.

 d off.
   Nay, do not speak so loud. What men are these
   Who pass the gate just now? shall we not stop them?


 Enter some of the leagued chiefs in disguise through the gate.
 st off.
   No, do not trouble them. They are, I guess,
   Some 'nighted rustics frighten'd with the sky,
   Who seek the shelter of man's habitation.
   In such an awful hour men crowd together,
   As gath'ring sea-fowl flock before a storm.
   With such a welkin blazing o'er our heads,
   Shall men each other vex? e'en let them pass.


 Enter a crowd of frightened women and children.
 d off.
   See what a crowd of women this way come,
   With crying children clinging to their knees,
   And infants in their arms! How now, good matrons?
   Where do you run?

 st wom.
   O do not stop us! to St. Alban's shrine
   We run: there will we kneel, and lift our hands,
   For that his holy goodness may protect us
   In this most awful hour.

 d wom.
                                            On, sisters, on!
   The fiery welkin rages o'er our heads,
   And we are sinful souls: O quickly move!


 Exeunt women and children.
 d off.
   I also am, alack! a sinful soul:
   I'll follow them and pray for mercy too.

 st off.
   I'll to the northern wall, from whence the heavens
   In full expanse are seen.


 Exeunt severally.
SCENE V.
Ethwald ' s apartment: he is discovered sitting by his couch, with his elbows resting upon his knees, and supporting his head between both his hands; the Queen standing by him.
Queen.
   Why sit you thus, my lord? it is not well:
   It wears your strength: I pray you go to rest.

 A pause, and he makes no answer.
   These nightly watchings much retard your cure;
   Be then advis'd!

 A pause, and he still takes no notice.
   Why are you thus unwilling?
   The tower is barr'd, and all things are secure.

Ethw.
   How goes the hour? is it the second watch?

Queen.
   No, near the window now, I heard the guard
   Exchange the word: the first is but half spent.

Ethw.
   And does the fearful night still lie before me
   In all its hideous length?

 Rising up with emotion. 
   O ye successive terms of gloomy quiet!
   Over my mind ye pass like rolling waves
   Of dense oppression; while deep underneath
   Lie all its noble powers and faculties
   O'erwhelmed. If such dark shades must henceforth cross
   My chequer'd life with still returning horrors,
   O let me rest in the foul reptile's hole,
   And take from me the being of a man!

Queen.
   Too much thou givest way to racking thought:
   Take this: it is a draught by cunning skill
   Compounded curiously, and strongly charm'd;
   With secret virtue fill'd—it soothes the mind,
   And gives the body rest.


 Offering him a cup.
Ethw.
   Sayst thou? then in good sooth I need it much.
   I thank thee too; thou art a careful wife.

 Takes the cup, and as he is about to put it to his lips, stops short and looks suspiciously at her.
   It has, methinks, a strange unkindly smell.
   Taste it thyself; dost thou not take my meaning?
   Do thou first drink of it.

Queen.
   I am in health, my lord, and need it not.

Ethw.
   By the dread powers of darkness, thou shalt drink it!
   Ay, to the very dregs!

Queen.
   What, would you cast on me such vile suspicions,
   And treat a royal princess like your slave?

Ethw.
   And so thou art. Thou rearst thy stately neck,
   And while I list, thou flarest in men's eyes
   A gorgeous queen; but unto me thou art—
   I do command thee, drink it to the dregs.


Queen subdued, and lifting the cup to her lips . Then be convinced how wrongful are thy thoughts.
Ethw.

 preventing her .
   Forbear, I am too slightly mov'd to anger.
   I should have known the being of thy state
   Is all too closely with my fortune link'd.
   Give me the cup. Thou sayst it soothes the mind?
   If I indeed could rest-
 Tastes it .
It tastes not well;
   It is a bitter drug.

Queen.
   Then give it me again; I'll hie to Dwina,
   And get from her that which shall make it sweet.


 She walks to the door of another apartment, but as she is about to go out , Ethwald hurries after her, and catches her by the arm.


 
Ethw.
   Thou shalt not go and leave me thus alone.

Queen.
   I'll soon return again, and all around thee
   Is light as noon-day.

Ethw.
   Nay, nay, good wife, it rises now before me
   In the full blaze of light.

Queen.
                                            Ah! what meanst thou?

Ethw.
   The faint and shadowy forms,
   That in obscurity were wont to rise
   In sad array, are with the darkness fled.
   But what avails the light? for now since sickness
   Has press'd upon my soul, in my lone moments,
   E'en in the full light of my torch-clad walls,
   A horrid spectre rises to my sight,
   Close by my side, and plain and palpable,
   In all good seeming and close circumstance,
   As man meets man.

Queen.
   Merey upon us! what form does it wear?

Ethw.
   My murder'd brother's form.
   He stands close by my side; his ghastly head
   Shakes horridly upon its sever'd neck
   As if new from the headsman's stroke; it moves
   Still as I move; and when I look upon it,
   It looks—No, no! I can no utterance find
   To tell thee how it looks on me again.

Queen.
   Yet, fear not now: I shall not long be absent;
   And thou mayst hear my footsteps all the while,
   It is so short a space.


 Exit Queen.
Ethw.

 returning to the middle of the stage .
   I'll fix my steadfast eyes upon the ground,
   And turn to other things my tutor'd thoughts
   Intently.  After pausing for a little while, with his clenched hands crossed upon his breast, and his eyes fixed upon the ground. 
   It may not be; I feel upon my mind
   The horrid sense that preludes still its coming.
   Elburga! ho, Elburga!


 Putting his hand before his eyes, and calling out with a strong voice of fear. 

Enter Queen in haste.
Queen.
                                            Has't come again?

Ethw.
   No; but I felt upon my pausing soul
   The sure and horrid sense of its approach.
   Hadst thou not quickly come, it had ere now
   Been frowning by my side. The cup, the cup!


 Drinks eagerly.
Queen.
   Heaven grant thee peace!
   Wilt thou not send unto the holy priest,
   To give thee ghostly comfort?

Ethw.

 shaking his head .
   Away, away! to thee and to thy priests
   I have, alas! lent too much heed already.

Queen.
   Let not your noble spirit thus be shent!
   Still bear good heart! these charmed drugs full soon
   Will make you strong and vig'rous as before;
   And in the rough sport of your northern war,
   You will forget these dreadful fantasies.

Ethw.
   Ay, thou speakst wisely now: methinks I still,
   In the embattled field, 'midst circling hosts,
   Could do the high deeds of a warlike king;
   And what a glorious field now opens to me!
   But, oh! this cursed bar; this ill-timed sickness;
   It keeps me back ev'n like a bitted steed.
   But it was ever thus! What have avail'd
   My crimes, and cares, and blood, and iron toil?

Queen.
   What have avail'd! art thou not king of Mercia?

Ethw.
   Ay, ay, Elburga! 'tis enough for thee
   To tower in senseless state and be a queen;
   But to th' expanded and aspiring soul,
   To be but still the thing it long has been
   Is misery, e'en though enthron'd it were
   Under the cope of high imperial state.
   O cursed hind'rance! blasting fiends breathe on me.
   Putst thou not something in thy damned drugs
   That doth retard my cure? I might ere this
   With cased limbs have stridden the clanging field,
   And been myself again.—Hark! some one comes.


 Listening with alarm.
Queen.
   Be not disturb'd, it is your faithful groom.
   Who brings the watch-dog; all things are secure.

Ethw.
   Nay, but I heard the sound of other feet.

 Running to the door, and pushing in a great bar.
   Say, who art thou without?

Voice without.
   Your groom, my lord, who brings your faithful dog.

Ethw.

 to Queen .
   Didst thou not hear the sound of other feet?

Queen.
   No, only his; your mind is too suspicious.

Ethw.
   I in his countenance have mark'd of late
   That which I liked not: were this dreary night
   But once o'ermaster'd, he shall watch no more.

 Opens the door suspiciously, and enters an armed man leading in a great watch-dog: the door is shut again hastily and the bar is replaced.  To the dog. 
   Come, rough and surly friend!
   Thou only dost remain on whom my mind
   Can surely trust. I'll have more dogs so train'd.

 Looking steadfastly at the groom.
   Thy face is pale: thou hast a haggard look:
   Where hast thou been?

 Seizing him by the neck.
   Answer me quickly! Say, where hast thou been?

Gr.
   Looking upon the broad and fearful sky.

Queen.
   What sayst thou?

Gr.
   The heaven's are all a flaming o'er our heads,
   And fiery spears are shiv'ring through the air.

Ethw.
   Hast thou seen this?

Gr.
                                            Ay, by our holy saint!

Queen.
   It is some prodigy, dark and portentous.

Gr.
   A red and bloody mantle seems outstretch'd
   O'er the wide welkin, and—



 
Ethw.
   Peace, damned fool!
   Tell me no more: be to thy post withdrawn.


 Exit groom by a small side-door, leading the dog with him.
Ethw.

 to himself, after musing for some time .
   Heaven warring o'er my head! there is in this
   Some fearful thing betoken'd.
   If that, in truth, the awful term is come,
   The fearful bound'ry of my mortal reach,
   O'er which I must into those regions pass
   Of horror and despair, to take my place
   With those who do their blood-earn'd crowns exchange
   For ruddy circles of devouring fire:
   Where hopeless woe and gnashing agony
   Writhe in the dens of torment; where things be
   Yet never imaged in the thoughts of man,
   Dark, horrible, unknown—
   I'll mantle o'er my head, and think no more.


 Covers his head with his cloak, and sinks down upon the couch.
Queen.
   Nay, rather stretch you on the fleecy bed.

Ethw.
   Rest, if thou canst, I do not hinder thee.

Queen.
   Then truly I will lean my head awhile.
   I am o'erspent and weary.


 Leans on the couch.
Ethw.

 hastily uncovering his face .
   Thou must not sleep: watch with meand be silent:
   It is an awful hour!

 A long pause; then Ethwald starting up from the couch with alarm.
   I hear strange sounds ascend the winding stairs.

Queen.
   I hear them too.

Ethw.
                                            Ha! dost thou also hear it?
   Then it is real.
 Listening. 
I hear the clash of arms.
   Ho, guard! come forth.


Re-enter Groom.
   Go, rouse my faithful dog:
   Dark treason is upon us.

Gr.

 disappears and then re-entering .
   He sleeps so sound, my lord, I cannot rouse him.

Ethw.
   Then, villain, I'm betray'd! thou hast betray'd me!
   But set thy brawny strength against that door,
   And bar them out: if thou but seemst to flinch,
   This sword is in thy heart.


 A noise of armed men is now heard at the door endeavouring to break it open, whilst Ethwald and the groom set their shoulders to it to prevent them. Enter Dwina hastily from an inner apartment, and with the Queen assists in putting their strength also to the door, as the force without increases. The door is at last broken open, and Hereulf , with the rebel chiefs, burst in sword in hand.
Her.

 to Ethwald .
   Now, thou fell ruthless lion, that hast made
   With bloody rage thy native forest waste!
   The spearmen are upon thee! to the strife
   Turn thy rough breast: thou canst no more escape.

Ethw.
   Quick to thy villain's work, thou wordy coward,
   Who in the sick man's chamber seekst the fame
   Thou dar'st not in th' embattled field attain!
   I am prepar'd to front thee and thy mates,
   Were ye twice numbered o'er.


 Sets his back to a pillar, and puts himself into a posture of defence.
Her.
   The sick man's chamber! darest thou, indeed,
   Begrimed as thou art with blood and crimes
   'Gainst man committed, human rights assume?
   Thou art a hideous and envenom'd snake,
   Whose wounded length even in his noisome hole,
   Men fiercely hunt, for love of human kind;
   And wert thou scotch'd to the last ring of life,
   E'en that poor remnant of thy curs'd existence
   Should be trod out in the dust.

Ethw.
   Come on, thou boasting fool! give thy sword work,
   And spare thy cursed tongue.

Her.
                                            Ay, surely will I!
   It is the sword of noble Ethelbert:
   Its master's blood weighs down its heavy strokes;
   His unseen hand directs them.


 They fight : Ethwald defends himself furiously, but at last falls, and the conspirators raise a loud shout.
 st ch.
   Bless heaven, the work is done!

 d ch.
   Now Mercia is reveng'd, and free-born men
   May rest their toil'd limbs in their peaceful homes.

 d ch.

 going nearer the body .
   Ha! does he groan?

 d ch.
   No, he dies sullenly, and to the wall
   Turns his writh'd form and death-distorted visage.


 A solemn pause, whilst Ethwald , after some convulsive motions, expires.
Her.
   Now hath his loaded soul gone to its place,
   And ne'er a pitying voice from all his kind
   Cries, “God have merey on him!”

 d ch.
   I've vow'd to dip my weapon in his blood.

st ch.
   And so have I.


 Several of them advancing with their swords towards the body, a young man steps forth, and stretches out his arm to keep them off.
Young man.
   My father in the British wars was seiz'd
   A British prisoner, and with all he had
   Unto a Mercian chief by lot consign'd;
   Mine aged grandsire, lowly at his feet,
   Rent his grey hair; Ethwald, a youthful warrior,
   Receiv'd the old man's pray'r and set him free;
   Yea, even to the last heifer of his herds
   Restor'd his wealth.


 
   For this good deed, do not insult the fallen.
   He was not ruthless once.


 They all draw back, and retire from the body. The Queen, who has, during the fight, &c., remained at a distance, agitated with terror and suspense, now comes forward to Hereulf with the air of one who supplicates for mercy, and Dwina , following close behind her, fulls upon her knees, as if to beseech him in favour of her mistress.
Queen.
   If thou of good king Oswal, thine old master.
   Aught of remembrance hast—

Her.
                                            I do remember:
   And deeply grieve to think a child of his
   Has so belied her mild and gentle stock.
   Nothing hast thou to fear: in some safe place,
   In holy privacy, mayst thou repent
   The evil thou hast done; for know, proud dame,
   Thou art beneath our vengeance.
   But as for thine advisers, that dark villain,
   The artful Alwy, and that impious man,
   Who does dishonour to his sacred garb,
   Their crimes have earn'd for them a bitter meed,
   And they shall have it.

 d ch.
   Shall we not now the slumb'ring Mercians rouse,
   And tell our countrymen that they are free
   From the oppressor's yoke?

Her.
   Yes, thou sayst well: through all the vexed land
   Let every heart bound at the joyful tidings!
   Thus from his frowning height the tyrant falls
   Like a dark mountain, whose interior fires,
   Raging in ceaseless tumult, have devour'd
   Its own foundations. Sunk in sudden ruin
   To the tremendous gulf, in the vast void
   No friendly rock rears its opposing head
   To stay the dreadful crash.
   The joyful hinds, with grave and chasten'd joy,
   Point to the traveller the hollow vale
   Where once it stood, and the now sunned cots,
   Where, near its base, they and their little ones
   Dwelt trembling in its deep and fearful shade.


 Exeunt.

NOTES
 Probably I have received this idea from Samson Agonistes, where Dalilah is compared to a stately ship of Tarsus “with all her bravery on, and tackle trim,” &c.
 It is natural to suppose that the diviners or fortune-tellers of this period should, in their superstitions and pretensions, very much resemble the ancient Druidesses who were so much revered amongst the Britons as oracles and prophetesses, and that they should, amongst the vulgar, still retain the name of their great predecessors. In Henry's History of Britain, vol. i. p. ., it will be found that the superstitious practices of the Druids continued long after their religion was abolished, and resisted for a long time the light of Christianity; and that even so late as the reign of Canute, it was necessary to make laws against it.
 I will not take upon me to say that, if I had never read Shakspeare's Macbeth, I should have thought of bringing Ethwald into a cavern under ground to inquire his destiny, though I believe this desire to look into futurity particularly in a superstitious age is a very constant attendant on ambition; but I hope the reader will not find in the above scene any offensive use made of the works of that great master.
 For this third song, which is the only literary assistance either in verse or prose that I have ever received, I am indebted to the pen of a friend.
 Should this play ever have the honour of being represented upon any stage, a scene of this kind, in which so many inferior actors would be put into situations requiring the expression of strong passion, might be a disadvantage to it; I should, therefore, recommend having the front of the stage on which the Thanes are, during the last part of the scene, thrown into deep shade, and the light only to come across the background at the bottom of the stage: this would give to the whole a greater solemnity; and by this means no expression of countenance, but only that of gesture, would be required of them.



THE SEPARATION: A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Garcio , an Italian count.

Rovani , his friend.

Gonzalos , an old officer.

The Marquis of Tortona.

Ludovico , seneschal of the castle.

Gauvino , chamberlain.

Pietro , servant.

Gomez , servant.

Hermit, &c. &c.

WOMEN Margaret , wife to Garcio.

Sophera , her attendant and friend.

Nurse, &c.



Scene, a small state in Italy.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A chamber, with a great screen at the bottom of the stage, behind which part of a bed is seen, and voices heard as the curtain draws up, while Pietro and Gomez are discovered on the front, looking from a half-opened door, as if listening.
Gomez.
   What said he last? the word died on his tongue.

Pie.
   So much the better.

Gomez.
   Makes he confession? Hast thou listen'd long?
   He ever wore, e'en in his days of health,
   The scowling eye of an unquiet mind,
   And some black deed disturbs his end. E'en so;
   Thy face confirms it.

Pie.
                                            We shall be discover'd.


 Exeunt, shutting the door softly, while Ludovico and Gauvino come forward from behind the screen.
Gau.

 looking earnestly at Ludovico , before he speaks .
   What thinkst thou of it?

Lud.
                                            It is very strange.

Gau.
   'Tis but the fever'd ravings of disease:
   Hast thou more serious thoughts?

Lud.
   I would our good confessor were arrived,
   Whate'er my thoughts may be.

Gau.
   Ay; then I can divine them. To my judgment,
   He speaks like one more forced to utterance
   By agony of mind than the brain's sickness.
   The circumstances of the horrid deed;
   The wondrous fleetness of his gallant steed
   Which bore Count Garcio through the forest paths—

Lud.
   Cease, cease! I would the father were arrived.

Gau.
   It was his fav'rite steed, and yet he ne'er
   Made mention of its name or of its end,
   But, when we praised its fleetness, frown'd in silence.
   I've wonder'd oft at this, but thought no ill.

Lud.
   Nor think it now. It is not credible,—
   Making, as then he did, a lover's suit
   To the fair Margaret, Ulrico's sister,—
   That he should murder him.

Gau.
   He was the heir of all Ulrico's lands.

Lud.
   True; so he was.

Gau.
   Ulrico loved him not, and oft opposed
   His suit as most presumptuous. But for this,
   Her brother's sudden end, the lovely maid
   Had ne'er been Garcio's wife.

Lud.
   All this is true; and yet, perhaps, those facts
   Have on the mind of this poor dying wretch
   Impress'd dark fancies, which the fever'd brain
   Shapes into actual deed. Oh, it is horrible!
   Canst thou believe one of his noble race
   Could do a deed befitting ruffian hands,
   And only such? Had he thus wickedly
   Devised Ulrico's death, some hired assassin
   Had done the bloody work, not his own hands.

Gau.
   Well, but what thinkst thou of his strange aversion


 
   To this, the goodliest seat our country boasts?
   Although his countess oft hath urged him to it,
   He hath not since his marriage here resided,—
   Nay, hath not pass'd a night within these walls:
   And, but that he is absent at the wars,
   E'en though the recent earthquake has in ruins
   His other castle laid, and forced us thence,
   This mansion had remain'd untenanted.

Lud.
   I would the ghostly father were arrived!

 Voice heard behind the screen. 
   Blood will accuse:
   —am I not cursed for this?

Lud.
   He speaks again: I thought that for the while
   He had been sunk into a state of stupor.
   Go thou and watch by him, Gauvino; haste!
   For steps approach, and none must be admitted.

 Gauvino retires behind the screen; and Ludovico , running to the door, meets Sophera , and endeavours to prevent her entering.
   Thou mayst not come: he's still; he is asleep:
   Thou canst not see him.


 Voice heard again.
Soph.
   Asleep, sayst thou? do I not hear his voice?
   Nay, let me pass; I will not be withheld.
   My lady follows me with some good drug
   To chafe his brow, poor wretch! and give him comfort.

Lud.
   Return, and tell the countess to forbear:
   She must not see him; foul unwholesome air
   Has made the chambers noxious. Hie thee back,
   And say she must not come.

Soph.
   And dost thou think this will prevent her? Never,
   E'en from the sick-bed of her meanest servant,
   Hath she stood fearfully aloof, when comfort
   Could be administer'd.
   I've seen the pain-rack'd wretch smile in his pain
   To see his lady's sweetly pitying face
   Peep past his ragged curtain, like a gleam
   Of kindly sunshine, bidding him good morrow.
   And thinkst thou now, from this poor dying man,
   The oldest faithful follower of her lord,
   To keep her back with such a plea as this?

Lud.
   Cease! urge no more. Return; she must not come:
   The sick man is distorted-grown, and changed,
   Fearful to look upon: a lady's gentleness
   May not such sight abide.

Soph.
                                            A poor excuse!
   Hast thou forgotten when those wounded soldiers
   Lay near our walls, after a bloody skirmish
   Left on the field from which their comrades fled,
   How she did stand with steady master'd pity,
   'Midst horrid sights from which her women fled
   With looks averted, till each bleeding wretch
   Was bound and comforted? Distorted, sayst thou!
   Who goes to chambers of discase and death
   To look on pleasant sights?

 Voice again. 
                                            I did not murder him.

Soph.
   He spoke of murder!


 Ludovico pressing her back as she advances eagerly towards the screen, whilst Gauvino comes forward to assist him.
Lud.
   Thou shalt as soon pass through my body, fool!
   Such cursed obstinacy! art thou mad?
   If thou regardst thy lady's peace of mind,
   Fly, I conjure thee, and prevent her coming.


Enter Countess behind them.
Countess.
   And why, good Ludovico?

Lud.

 who starts on seeing her .
   Gracious heaven!

Countess.
   Why lookst thou so aghast! Is Baldwin dead?

Lud.
   He is; and therefore go not.


 She still endeavours to pass. No, no! he is not; be entreated, madam!
Countess.
   What cause so strangely moves thee?

Lud.
   A powerful cause, that must not be reveal'd.
   O, be entreated then!

 Voice again. 
   Ulrico's blood was shed by Garcio's hand,
   Yet I must share the curse.

Lud.
   Run to him quickly! wherefore didst thou leave him?


 Gauvino again retires as before.
Countess.
   What words were those he utter'd?

Lud.
   Words of despair and frenzy; heed them not,
   But quit the chamber. O, for heaven's sake, go!


 Exeunt ; Ludovico hurrying off the Countess and Sophera.
SCENE II.
A small ante-room or passage.

Enter Pietro and Gomez by opposite sides.
Gomez.
   Is the confessor with poor Baldwin still?

Pie.
   He is; but, as I guess, will leave him presently;
   I heard, just now, the chamber-door unlock'd.
   I'll keep my station here, and see him pass.

Gomez.
   And so will I. Ha! yonder, see, he
   comes.

Pietro.
   His head bends to the ground, and o'er his eyes
   His hood is drawn: would I could see his face!
   He is the cousin of our seneschal,—
   I'll speak to him.
Enter a Friar, walking hastily across the stage.

   Good father! give your blessing:
   How is your penitent?


 Friar waves him off with his hand, and exil .
Gomez.
   He motions with his hand and will not speak.



 
Pie.
   In so much haste to go! this is not well.

 Shaking his head.
   No, no! it hath a dark and rueful look.
   Well; God be praised! these hands are free from blood.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
The apartment of the Countess; she is discovered pacing to and fro with slow, thoughtful steps, then stops short, and stands in a musing posture some time before she speaks aloud.
Countess.
   'Tis often thus; so are we framed by nature.
   How oft the fitful wind or sullen bell
   Will utter to the ear distinctive words,
   According with the fancy's wild conceptions!
   So are the brains of sick and frenzied men
   Stored with unreal and strange imaginations.

 After a short pause. 
   Am I become a maniac?
   Oh! have words,
   To which the firm conviction of my mind
   So strongly stands opposed, the baleful power
   To fix this misery on me? This is madness!
Enter Sophera behind.

   Is't thou, Sophera?

Soph.
                                            Yes, 'tis only I.

Countess.
   Is every decent office of respect
   Done to the corse?

Soph.
                                            Yes, nought has been omitted.

Countess.
   'Tis well; but what detains the good confessor?
   I wish'd to see him.

Soph.
                                            He stay'd but till his wretched penitent
   Had breathed his last, and quickly left the castle.

Countess.
   He is in haste, methinks; 'tis somewhat strange.
   Why lookst thou on me with that fearful eye?
   Thinkst thou the ravings of a frenzied mind
   Have power to move me?

Soph.
   I only thought—I fear'd—you wisely judge;
   Why should they move you? Well, the dismal story
   Of that most dismal murder, here committed
   By hands unknown, might to a sickly brain
   Such thoughts create of nothing.

Countess.
   What sayst thou? here committed!

Soph.
   Did not your hapless brother in this castle
   Come to his end?

Countess.
                                            Yes, but a natural end.

Soph.
   So grant it were! it is not so reported.

Countess.
   Ha! what is else reported?

Soph.
   The peasants round all idle stories credit;
   And say that in his castle, by his servants,
   He was discover'd in the eastern tower
   Murder'd. But, doubtless, 'tis a tale of falschood,
   Since 'tis to thee unknown.

Countess

 sinking back into a chair .
   It was to me unknown.

 After a long pause. 
   Dear, dear! the friend, the brother of my heart,
   The playmate of my early, happy days,
   Could such a fate be thine!
   It makes me weep to think it possible,
   Yet I believe it not.

Soph.
                                            You tremble much.

Countess.
   I'm cold and chill: 'tis weariness of body;
   Do not regard it; I shall soon be better.

 Trumpet sounds without.
   A trumpet! then some martial guest approaches.
   O most unwelcome!

Soph.
                                            'Tis Tortona's Marquis.

Countess.
   He is not in these parts; it cannot be.

Soph.
   He is upon his march with some gay troops
   To join the army, and hath made a halt
   Here in our nearest town to rest his men.
   So said his servant, whom I found this morning
   Lurking within the castle; and I guess
   His warlike lord is come.

Countess.
                                            I cannot see him.
   Go thou; plead my excuse: I am unwell;
   Say what thou wilt, but let me be excused.
Enter Rovani.

   Rovani here!—O, how is this? My lord?

Rov.
   He is not far behind. I am, fair lady,
   The vanguard of his band; and, as I trust,
   Bearing no dismal tidings.

Countess.
   O no! they should, indeed, be joyful, if—
   And, as in truth I trust—my lord is well!

Rov.
   Yes; from the wars, unhurt and strong in health,
   Garcio returns! where he has done the service
   Of an undaunted powerful combatant,
   To that of a right skilful leader join'd.
   He is not one of your reserved chiefs,
   Who, pointing with their dainty fingers, thus,
   Say, “Go, my friends, attack yon frowning ranks.”
   No, by my faith! with heavy scimitar
   He closes to the bloody work himself,
   And to the carnage of each grizly field
   Brings his full tale of death.

Countess

 shrinking back .
   Is he so ruthless, then?

Rov.
                                            Ay, in the field.
   But in your hall or bower, where ladies smile,
   Who is more gentle? Thus it often is:
   A lady feels not on her soldier's hand,
   That softly presses her more gentle palm,
   The deaths which it has dealt.

Soph.
   I'm sure, were but thy rapier like thy tongue,
   The count must have in thee an able second.

Rov.
   I may not boast; but doth my circled finger


 
   More rudely press thy snowy arm, fair maid,
   Because this graven jewel was the gift
   Of a great Moorish princess, whose rude foe
   I slew before her eyes?

Soph.
   Some angry puppy that with snarling mouth
   Snapp'd at her robe or sandal'd heels, belike.

Rov.
   Nay, by my faith! a foe in worth mine equal.

Soph.
   That I will grant thee readily. But say,
   How far behind thee is the noble count?

Countess.
   Ay, is he near?

Rov.
                                            Within a few short miles.
   The war has ended sooner than we guess'd,
   And we have made good speed.

Countess.
                                            So near!

Rov.
   How is it? This affects you strangely.

Countess.
   Such unexpected news! I should be glad,
   But gladness comes with pain. I will retire,
   And for a moment strive to calm this tremor.

To Sophera. 
   Follow me not.


 Exit.
Rov.

 looking after her as she goes off .
   I have, ere now, beheld the sudden news
   Of a good lord's return from foreign lands
   By wedded dame received; but so received,
   Never till now. How's this? What is the matter?
   How shall a simple bachelor, as I am,
   Have thoughts of this bless'd state, if such as she
   Cold and capricious prove?

Soph.
   Blame her not hastily; she is depress'd:
   Old Baldwin, whom his master left behind,
   That faithful servant, died with us this morning.

Rov.
   Alas, poor soul! and he is gone at last!
   Well, we have brought you thirsty throats enow
   To drink his fun'ral wassails. Ay, poor Baldwin!
   A hardy knave thou wast in better days.
   If I had known of this, heav'n rest his soul!
   I had not sounded my approach so cheerly.

Soph.
   To tell the truth, that martial sound deceived us.
   We took you for Tortona's warlike lord,
   Who, to refresh his passing troops, we hear,
   Has made a halt:—I thought—

Rov.
                                            Out with thy thought!
   Why dost thou hesitate?—I will explain it.
   I've brought you disappointment.

Soph.
                                            You mistake me.

Rov.
   Nay, pardon me; I linger here too long:
   But,—ere I go,—how does the infant heir?
   I must tell Garcio I have seen his boy,

Soph.
   With pleasure I'll conduct thee. 'Tis an urchin
   Provoking smiles of love from every face
   That looks upon him, be it e'er so stern.

Rov.
   How then will a fond father feel!—How oft—
   How oft and fondly hath he talk'd of him!
   Though but a little grasp of shapeless life,
   With puling whine, just winking to the light,
   As I remember well, when Garcio left him.

Soph.
   Is Garcio, then, so tender?

Rov.
                                            Dost thou doubt it?
   The bear doth love his cub, bear though he be:
   But Garcio is a man of strong affections.
   Come, pray thee, lead.


 Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A wild alley with a grove behind. Martial music heard without.

Then enter Garcio with his soldiers on march, and Gonzalos.
Gar.
   Halt, my brave comrades; here we'll rest awhile
   Till sultry noon be past. Those spreading trees
   Will give you shade.

To Gonzalos. 
   Seest thou Rovani coming?

Gon.
   No, good my lord; but through the trees I see
   Your castle's turrets brighten'd with the sun.
   Look there! it is a fair, enliv'ning sight.

Gar.

turning away, after a hasty look .
   I see, I see.—But wherefore stays Rovani!

To soldiers. 
   Go, choose, each as he lists, his spot of rest;
   I'll keep me here.
 Gonzalos and the soldiers retire to the bottom of the stage, but still appear partially through the trees.

After musing some time. 

                                            An infant's life!
   What is an infant's life? the chilly blast,
   That nips the blossom, o'er the cradle breathes,
   And child and dam like blighted sweetness fade.
   If this should be! O, dear, uncertain bliss!
   Shame on his tardy steps!—Ha! here he comes!
Enter Rovani , while Garcio runs up to him eagerly.

   They are alive? they're well? And thou hast seen them?

Rov.
   Your lady and your son?

Gar.

impatiently .
                        Ay, ay!

Rov.
                                            They're well.

Gar.
   Thank heav'n, they are!—But yet thy words are slow:
   Does she not follow thee? Waits she my coming?

Rov.
   She surely does expect it.

Gar.
   What voice, what looks are these? O speak more freely!
   If there be merey in thee, speak more freely!

 Pauses and looks earnestly at him.
   Something is wrong—I have nor wife nor child!

Rov.
   They are both well: have I not spoken plain words?



 
Gar.
   Plain words! yes, baldly plain; reserved and heartless.
   Thou dost not use me like a fellow soldier,
   In the same warfare worn.—What hast thou seen?
   Thou sayst my lady's well: did she receive,
   With a wife's joy, the news of my return?

Rov.
   I am not skill'd to say; for dispositions
   Of various hues are variously affected.
   The news were sudden and unlook'd for: oft
   The joy of such is clouded and disturb'd.
   She did withdraw in secrecy to hide
   Her strong emotions.

Gar.
                                            She was strongly moved?

Rov.
   I know not how it was. The servants, too,
   Whisper'd together as I pass'd, and look'd
   With a strange staring gravity upon me.
   Dull clowns! who should have cast their caps in air
   For joy of your return. Baldwin is dead;
   And if for him they wear those sombre looks,
   Good piteous souls they are. A courtly damsel,
   Attending on the countess, did, forsooth!
   Mistake my trumpet for the glad arrival
   Of some gay visitor, who was expected;
   Whose buxom train, no doubt, contains some youth
   More grateful to her sight than war-worn knight,
   Such as my paltry self.

Gar.
                                            What visitor?

Rov.
   That very martial lord,
   The Marquis of Tortona, save his worth!
   For he conducts his soldiers through these parts,
   And makes a halt in this fair neighbourhood,
   Some days or so, for needful recreation.

 A pause.
   What! stay we here to ruminate upon it?
   Will that avail?—Come, onward to the castle!
   And, be our welcome there or cold or kind,
   'Tis what heav'n sends us.

Gar.
                                            Off; disturb me not!
   Thy heart is light.

Rov.
                                            No, Garcio; 'tis not light
   If thine be heavy. I have told my tale
   Too well I see it now—but foolishly:
   Yet their cold looks provoked me.—Brood not on it:
   There is one face, at least, within your walls
   Will smile on you with sweet and guileless smiles:
   A noble boy,—might call a monarch father,
   Ay, by my faith! and do him honour, too.

Gar.
   Does he lisp sounds already?—And so lovely?
   I've found tears now, press'd being that I am!
   Come then; I'll summon strength: whate'er betide,
   Or good or ill, I'll meet it.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
An apartment in the castle.

Enter Countess and Sophera.
Countess.
   He is within the gates; here will I stop,
   Nor wander further: I'll receive him here.

Listening. 
   Heaven give me strength! his well known steps so near me!


Enter Garcio ; he runs eagerly to embrace the Countess, who faints.
Gar.
   So moved! Can this be joy?

 Sophera chafes her hands and temples, while Garcio gazes on her with keen observation: she recovers.
                                            My gentle love,
   Who wast my gentle love, come I upon thee
   Like some unlook'd for,—some unwelcome thing?

Countess.
   Is it thy voice, my Garcio, in mine cars
   Sounding, as it was wont, the voice of love?

Gar.
   How should it sound to thee? The wars have spared me:
   The bullet and the sabre's stroke have err'd,
   To spare this head, where thousands fell around me;
   For I believed thy saintly prayers did mar
   Their death-commission'd power. Yes; I believed it.

Countess.
   And still believe it. Yes, my prayers were raised
   Most fervently to heav'n: and I will bless it,
   That thou art safe.


 Takes his hand in hers tenderly, and is about to press it to her breast, when a shuddering seizes her, and she lets it drop.
Gar.
   What is the matter? Thou art strangely seized.
   Does sudden illness chill thee?

Soph.
   The countess, good my lord, is much o'ercome.
   Her health is weak at present: agitation
   Strongly affects her. But she'll soon recover.

Gar.
   Thou answ'rest for her readily, young lady,
   And wisely too.


Enter Rovani , followed by Nurse, carrying a sleeping infant .
Rov.
   Come on, good nurse; thou needst not be ashamed
   To show thy bantling, sleeping or awake.
   A nobler, comelier, curly-pated urchin
   Ne'er changed the face of stern and warlike sire
   To tearful tenderness. Look here, my lord.

Gar.

turning eagerly round .
   The child! my child!


 Lifting the mantle that covers it, and gazing on the infant.
Rov.
   Ay, there are cheeks and lips like roses glowing;
   And, see, half-open'd eyelids show within
   The dewy azure of his sleeping eyes,
   Like loopholes in a cloud. Awake, sweet imp!

Gar.
   Nay, wake him not; his sleep is beautiful.
   Let me support—Come to my stirring heart,
   And here be cradled, thing of wondrous joy!

 Taking the child.


 
   Here, in the inmost core of beating life,
   I'd lodge thee. Mine thou art! yes, thou art mine!
   Here is my treasured being: thou wilt love me.

 Laying his face close to the child's.
   Bless'd softness! little hand and little cheek!
   This is a touch so sweet! a blessed touch!
   There is love in it; love that will not change!


 Bursting into tears, while the nurse takes the child again.
Countess

 aside, observing his emotion .
   O heaven, he weeps!—the tears of strong affection!
   Away, base doubts!

 Running to him, and clasping her arms round him.
   Garcio, dear Garcio! husband of my heart,
   And father of my boy! is there within thee
   Such soft and strong affection? O, there is!
   And with it every good and generous feeling.
   Forgive me, O forgive me!

Gar.
                                            How, my love?
   How wakes this sudden burst of tenderness?
   Dost thou at last feel for thy wretched husband
   The love of other days?—I've thought of thee—
   I've thought of this our meeting, but, alas!
   Not so my fancy shaped it.

Countess.
                                            O, forgive me!
   My mind was weak and brooded on dark thoughts.
   We'll cast them from us.—Yes, thy child, thy boy!
   Look on him still: they say that in his face
   There are some traits of thine. Observe his mouth;
   That smile—

Gar.
   Nay, that sweet smile I could not give him;
   No, nor those lips. He much resembles thee.

Countess.
   Thinkest thou so? Then haply thou perceiv'st
   Another likeness some have sadly traced;
   Dost thou perceive it?

Gar.
                                            No: another likeness?

Countess.
   In my sad lonely hours, I have imagined,
   And sooth'd me with the pleasing, mournful thought,
   He bears some faint resemblance to my brother,
   My poor Ulrico.

 Garcio 's countenance becomes stern, and looking again steadfastly on the child, he turns away in silence.
   It does not strike thee, then?

Gar.

 motioning the nurse to retire .
   We shall disturb his slumbers.

Countess

 to him reproachfully .
   Sent off without a kiss of kind endearment?

Gar.
   We should disturb him.


 Looking after the child as he is carried off.
Countess.
   Thine eye pursues him with a mournful look:
   Thou fearst, perhaps, an early fate may snap
   His thread of life, like his lamented uncle's.

Gar.
   No; past and future are but shadowy visions;
   Dark cumbrous things which we must cast aside
   To make the present hour endurable.
   Who waits without?—A cup of wine, I pray;
   I'm tired and faint.

Countess.
   Indeed, thou seemst unwell:
   I fear thou bringst not back thy wonted health.

Gar.
   I'm well,—I was in health, but this damp region,
   I breath not in it but with breath suppress'd.
   Thou knowst right well I never liked this place:
   Why art thou here?

Countess.
                                            It is necessity.

Gar.
   I know: I know; but other homes there are;
   We'll hence to-morrow.

Countess.
                                            Ha! so soon, my lord?

Gar.
   It must be so. I would retire awhile;
   Where is my chamber?

Countess.
                                            In the western tower.

Gar.
   No; I'll remain—I will not yet retire.

 Pacing to and fro, and then returning to her.
   I know not how it is; I'm fanciful;
   I like a southern chamber. Countess
in a faint voice, gazing fearfully upon him .
E'en as you will.


 Sophera , who has during the greater part of this scene retired to the bottom of the stage with Rovani , now comes forward.
Soph.
   Please you, my lord, to go, I will conduct you
   Where many fair apartments wait your choice.

Gar.
   I thank thee, courteous maid.


 Exit Sophera , followed by Garcio ; and the Countess, after a thoughtful pause, is about to break into strong exclamations, when, perceiving Rovani , she checks herself and goes out hastily.
Rov.

coming forward, and looking after her .
   All is not well: that step, those looks, those gestures,
   So quickly check'd when she perceived me near,
   Betray too visibly a mind disturb'd
   And far removed from joy. Garcio is come
   Unwelcomely upon her. Yet that burst
   Of what appear'd like tenderness and love
   When he caress'd his child!—I cannot think
   She has in act been false; though much I doubt.


Enter Gonzalos behind him.
Gon.
   Ha! mutt'ring to thyself! what are thy thoughts?

Rov.
   Faith! ill-condition'd, moody, foolish thoughts,
   Such as lone men, whose heart no kind mate cheers,
   Alone could harbour.—Heaven forgive me for it!
   I think our lady here had been well pleased
   If this, her valiant lord, had from the wars
   Return'd more leisurely.—Her quondam lover,
   The Marquis of Tortona, in the neighbourhood


 
   With his gay troops, bound for some petty fray
   By them, in lofty phrase, ycleped war,
   Has made a halt, and—

Gon.
                                            Fie! thou canst not think
   That she could turn her heart from valiant Garcio
   To such a fool as he?

Rov.
   Yet such strange things have happen'd.—
   True, indeed,
   So vile a change could not at once be made.
   But let us now imagine some soft dame,
   Whose valiant lord is absent, in her castle
   Spending her dull lone days.

 Changing his voice, and speaking fantastically.
   “Ha! who comes here?”—
   “Good madam,” saith her waiting gentlewoman,
   “A knight is at your gate.”—“He shall not enter:
   It is a fool; go, bid him wend his way.”—
   “And will you be so rude?”—“Ay, true indeed;
   Then, for good courtesy, since it must be,
   E'en bid him enter:—'tis a harmless fool.”—
   “Good day, fair dame.”—“The same to you, Sir Knight.”—
   “Might I presume—but how can words express it,
   The sunshine of your beauty dazzles so!—
   You will not chide me hence? What gentle goodness!
   Dear, precious moments, but so swiftly gone!”—
   Then whispers low the waiting gentlewoman,
   “Madam, may he return another day?”—
   “Well, well, he may, since thou wilt have it so.
   It is in truth an amiable fool.”

Gon.
   Fy, fy, Rovani! art thou not ashamed?
   Who would believe, in hearing thee expatiate
   On woman's weakness thus, that thou thyself
   Art but a poor dependent on her favour
   For all the bloom and sparkle of thy being—
   A very daily beggar of her smiles!

Rov.
   I , sayst thou? Where, in what nook of the earth,
   Lives she for whom I sigh?

Gon.
   Nay, rather ask in what nook of the earth
   She liveth not. There's ne'er a moving thing,
   That wears upon its form a woman's weed,
   Be it or short or tall, or pale or buxom,
   Or young or old, but thou dost roll thine eye,
   And writhe thy body to fantastic shapes
   Of affectation, to attract her notice.

Rov.
   Nay, spare me, good Gonzalos! I, perhaps,
   May, as I speak my jest or merry tale,
   With restless eye keep peering to the side
   Where beauty listens, too apparently;
   But think not this attack on female constancy—
   I mean this present individual push—
   By any other motive has been prompted,
   Than love and true regard for noble Garcio.
   After the toils and dangers he has pass'd,
   To see him thus received provokes me much.

Gon.
   Hush! be more prudent; speak thy mind less freely.
   Thy brain is ever full of idle fancies:
   Come to the air, and cool thy fev'rish spleen.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
Before the gate of the castle.

Enter Ludovico, Gauvino , and some inferior domestics from the gate, while martial music is heard without.
Gau.

 to Ludovico , after looking off the stage .
   'Tis as I guess'd; look, Mr. Seneschal!
   They bear the ensigns of Tortona. See!
   Their chief himself is marching in the van.

Lud.
   And, by my fay! a warlike face he wears,
   Lofty and grim.

Gau.
                                            Ay; full of awful terrors
   For quaking drum-boys and poor piping elves.

Lud.
   Comes he to visit thus our valiant lord,
   And show his warlike state? Heaven mend his wit!


Enter Tortona , with a few followers, in martial array.
Tor.
   Be not alarm'd, good sirs: though thus in arms,
   We at your lady's gate are harmless visitors,
   Who humbly crave admittance.


 Ludovico , as seneschal, steps forward to receive him with courtesy, while Gauvino mutters to himself.
Gau.
                                            Mighty man!
   What bless'd forbearance! For our lady's sake,
   He will not slay and eat us for a meal!

Tor.

to Ludovico .
   Good Mr. Seneschal, inform thy lady
   That I, Tortona's Marquis, and her slave,
   Most humbly beg permission at her feet—
   But here comes opportunity more tempting:
   A gentler messenger.


Enter Sophera.
Gau.

aside to Ludovico .
   Great condescending man! superb humility!

Tor.

to Sophera .
   Fair lady! most becoming, as I guess,
   The beauteous dame you serve; do me the favour

 Speaking in a lower voice, and leading her aside.
   To tell the noble mistress of this castle
   That one, devoted dearly to her service,
   Who breathes the air in which she breathes, as gales
   Wafted from Paradise, begs in her presence
   With all devotion to present himself.

Soph.

in a loud voice .
   The Marquis of Tortona, as I guess.

Tor.
   The same; and let not in your peaceful halls


 
   Our warlike mien alarm you. In the field
   Whate'er our power may be, forget it here.
   Within her precincts, Mars himself would doff
   His nodding helm, and bend in meek submission.

Soph.
   True, valiant lord; the brave are ever gentle
   In hall and bower. But think not warlike guise
   Will so alarm us now: there are within
   Whose nodding plumes, indeed, less downy are,
   Whose well-hack'd armour wears a dimmer hue,
   Who have already taught our timid eyes
   To look more boldly on such awful things.

Tor.
   How, those within? What meanst thou?

Soph.
                                            Ha, my lord!
   You come not then to wish the gentle countess
   Joy of her lord's return.

Tor.
   Is he return'd? It surely cannot be.

Soph.
   He is, in truth. This morning he arrived
   With many valiant soldiers from the wars,
   Where they have seen rough service.

Tor.
   That war so quickly ended?

Soph.
                                            Yes, my lord,
   And fortunately too. The Moors submit
   To the victorious arms of noble Garcio;
   Who, ere he left their coast, did for his prince
   A happy peace conclude. Will it not please you
   To enter, then, and bid him welcome home?

Tor.
   I should indeed,—but 'twill intrude upon him.
   He and his lady may, perhaps, desire
   Some hours of privacy.—Oblige me, then,
   And offer my respect—congratulation—
   I do but ill express the joy I feel.
   I will no longer trespass.

 Hurrying away, and then returning.
   'Tis delicacy makes me thus in haste,
   As thou wilt comprehend. Should time permit,
   Though much I fear to-morrow's sun will light us
   To other scenes, I will return and pay
   To the most noble count all courtesy.
   Fair maiden, fare thee well!

 Hurrying away, and returning again; then drawing her further aside and speaking softly in her ear.
   The count, as I am told, dislikes this castle:
   His stay, perhaps, may be of short duration?

Soph.
   Belike it may.

Tor.
   Though quitting this vicinity,
   My station for a time will not be distant.
   Couldst thou in such a case indite to me
   A little note of favour?
Taking her hand. 
Pretty hand!
   A billet penn'd by thee must needs contain
   Words of sweet import.—Fingers light and slender!

Offering to put on a ring. 
   Let this be favour'd.

Soph.
   Nay, my lord, excuse me.
   The pen these fingers use indites no billets
   Of such sweet import as you fondly guess:
   A housewife's recipe, or homely letter
   Of kind inquiry to some absent friend,
   Exhausts its power. Unskill'd to earn such gifts,
   I may not wear them.—Yonder comes Rovani,
   A noble soldier; stay and learn from him
   The story of the war. Word-bound he is not:
   He'll tell it willingly.


 Rovani , who has appeared at the gate, during the latter part of their discourse, observing them suspiciously, now comes forward.
Tor.
   No, no! I am in haste, farewell, farewell!


 Exit with his followers.
Lud.
   He goes, I trow, less grandly than he came.

Gau.
   Such hasty steps, indeed, somewhat derange
   The order of his high nobility.

Lud.
   Yet, pompous as he is, I have been told
   He is no coward.

Gau.
                                            I suspect him much.

Lud.
   But thou art wrong: although he doth assume
   Those foolish airs of martial gallantry,
   He is as brave as others.

Rov.

who has placed himself directly in front of Sophera , and has been looking for some time significantly in her face .
   So, gentle maid, your martial visitor
   Retreats right speedily. How fortunate,
   To meet so opportunely at the gate
   A prudent friend, to tell him what, perhaps,
   May save his bones, although it damp his pleasure!
   Nay, smile not: I commend thee in good earnest.
   Thou art a prudent maid, endow'd with virtues
   That suit thy station. This is ample praise.

Soph.
   Ample; and spoken too with meaning tones.
   What face is this thou wearst of sly significance?
   Go to! thou dup'st thyself with too much shrewdness;
   And canst not see what plainly lies before thee,
   Because thou aimst at seeing more. I'll in,
   And bear Tortona's greeting to my lord
   And to his countess.

Rov.
                                            Do; and give it all—
   The message and its postscript: words of audience,
   And those of gentle whisper following after.
   Let nothing be forgotten.

Soph.
   Nothing shall.
   Good day, and heaven curtail thee of thy wits
   To make thee wiser!


 Exit into the gate, and followed by Ludovico , &c. &c.
Rov.

alone .
   Ay, ay! a very woman! pleased and flatter'd
   With the stale flatt'ry of a practised coxcomb,
   Though plainly sueing for another's favour.
   A very, very woman!—As I guess'd,
   Some secret intercourse hath been in train,
   Although how far in blameful act advanced
   I know not.—Now, 'tis cross'd and interrupted.


 
   So will I e'en believe, and fret no more.
   What good have I in living free from wedlock,
   If I for husband's honour thus take thought?
   Better it were to wear the horns myself,
   Knowing it not, than fret for other men.


 Exit.
ACT III. SCENE I.
An apartment in the castle.

Enter Garcio and Ludovico , speaking as they enter.
Gar.
   Ha! with a priest! conferring with a priest!
   Have they been long together?

Lud.
                                            Full an hour.

Gar.
   And does she oft such ghostly counsel take?
   Has she of late?

Lud.
                        My lord?

Gar.
                                            O, nothing! nothing!
   Stare not as if I meant to question thee:
   I had no more to say.
 Motioning him away.

 Exit Ludovico.


Alone. 
   At such a time retired with her confessor!
   What! hath her lord's return caused in her mind
   Such sudden need of ghostly counsel?—Strange!
   Something hath been amiss: if not in act,
   She is, I fear, in will and fancy tainted.


Rovani enters behind him unperceived.
Rov.
   Nay, pure or tainted, leave the fancy free.
   Of her concerns who may cognizance take?
   Although cowl'd priests beneath their jurisdiction
   Pretend to hold her, be not thou so strict.

Gar.
   Thou knowst, then, that my wife is with her priest.

Rov.
   I knew it not.—She is a pious dame:
   She seems—she is a very pious dame.

Gar.
   Nay, speak thy mind! thou needst not hesitate.
   We have been fellow-soldiers nine long years:
   Thou ne'er wast wont to weigh thy words with me.
   What dost thou think? There is some cause for this.

Rov.
   Women are full of strange and fitful humours.

Gar.
   Not so; it is not that.—Yet, were she false,
   Methinks her shame-flush'd face would turn aside,
   Nor look on me so oft and earnestly
   As I have seen her gaze.—It cannot be!
   In act she is not false.—But if her heart,
   Where every kind and dear affection dwelt,—
   If it be changed—
stamping on the ground 
Some fiend hath been at work,—
   Some cursed agent hath been tamp'ring with her.


 Pacing to and fro in violent agitation.
Rov.
   Be not so wretched for a doubtful ill,
   Which, if it be at all—

Gar.
                                            A doubtful ill!
   Oh, if my head but ached, or fev'rish sleep,
   Or the more potent secret cause forced from me
   One groan or sigh, what tones of kind alarm!
   And the soft pressure of her gentle hand
   In mute affliction, till I smiled again!
   Here, on my bursting heart I feel it still,
   Though cold and changed she be.

After a gloomy pause. 
   Perhaps some awful and mysterious power
   Within these fated precincts doth for me
   Love to aversion turn.

Rov.
   What dost thou mean by a mysterious power?
   And but e'en now methought I heard thee name
   A potent secret cause.—Thou hast been wont
   Freely to make me sharer of thy thoughts—
   Of all thy secret wishes.

Gar.
                                            So I have:
   Nought for thy good to hear or mine to utter,
   Have I conceal'd from thee.—I hear a noise.

Rov.
   No; I hear nothing.

Gar.
                                            But my ear is quick;—
   Too quick, perhaps, in fancying sounds that are not.

Rov.
   Ay, thou art right: Sophera moved the latch.


Enter Sophera.
Gar.

to Sophera .
   Com'st thou to tell me that the priest is gone?

Soph.
   The countess did command me to inform you
   She is not well, and begs that for the night
   She may in solitude recruit her spirits.
   She wishes you good night and peaceful sleep.
   She bade me say, my lord, her malady
   Is of no ardent kind that should alarm you;
   But, as she hopes, will pass away ere morn.
Aside to Rovani , while Garcio turns away in silence. 
He takes it deeply.

Rov.

aside to her .
   No, faith! a soldier is too well inured
   To disappointment; knowing not at daybreak
   Whether his next night's slumber shall be had
   On silken couch, by some fair princess fann'd,
   Or on the cold damp earth, with dead men's bones
   His wounded head to pillow. No, sweet maid!
   We bear such evils lightly.

Soph.
   'Tis well ye do; and so, brave sir, good night!


 Exit.
Gar.

returning to Rovani .
   What thinkst thou of this message?

Rov.
                                            I know not what to think.

Gar.
   Thou dost! thou dost! for in thine eyes I read
   A shameful thought, that must remain unutter'd.
   Ruin, and shame, and misery come upon me!
   Heav'n pours its vengeance on this cursed head!



 
Rov.
   Nay, do not thus give way: be well assured
   Ere thou give loose to passion.

Gar.
   Assured! and how assured? What can I do?—
   Become a calm inquisitor of shame?

Rov.
   Restrain thyself, and go to thine apartment,
   As if to pass the night. But, some hours later,
   When all are gone to rest, steal softly forth
   Into thy lady's chamber. There thou'lt see
   If she indeed be sick, or if she hold
   The vigil of a guilt-distracted mind.

Gar.
   I like thy counsel well: I'll to my chamber.
   Good night, my friend.


 Exeunt severally.
SCENE II.
The bedchamber of the Countess, who is discovered sitting on a low seat by the side of the bed, with her head and arms thrown upon the bed. She raises her head, and, after a thoughtful pause, starts up eagerly.
Countess.
   It cannot be! The roused and angry deep
   Lashes its foaming billows o'er the bark
   That bears th' accursed freight, till the scared crew
   Into its yawning gulf cast forth the murderer.
   On the embattled field, in armour cased,
   His manly strength to blasted weakness turns.
   Yea, in their peaceful homes, men, as by instinct,
   From the dark rolling of his eye will turn
   They know not why, so legibly has Nature
   Set on his brow the mark of bloody Cain.
   And shall I think the prosp'rous Garcio,—he
   Whose countenance allured all eyes, whose smiles,
   Whose voice was love, whose frame with strong affection
   I've seen so dearly moved; who in my arms,
   Who in my heart hath lived—No! let dark priests,
   From the wild fancies of a dying man,
   Accuse him as they will, I'll not believe it.

After another pause. 
   Would in this better faith my mind had strength
   To hold itself unshaken! Doubt is misery.
   I'll go to him myself and tell my wretchedness.
   O! if his kindling eye with generous ire
   Repel the charge;—if his blest voice deny it,
   Though one raised from the dead swore to its truth,
   I'll not believe it.
Enter Sophera.

   What brings thee here again? Did I not charge thee
   To go to bed?

Soph.
                                            And so I did intend.
   But in my chamber, half prepared for rest,
   Op'ning the drawer of an ancient cabinet
   To lay some baubles by, I found within—

Countess.
   What hast thou found?

Soph.
   Have I not heard you say, that shortly after
   Your marriage with the count, from your apartment,
   A picture of your brother, clad in mail,
   A strong resemblance, over which your tears
   Had oft been shed, was stol'n away?

Countess.
                                            Thou hast.
   How it was stol'n, for value it had none
   For any but myself, I often wonder'd.
   Thou hast not found it?

Soph.
                                            See! this I have found.


 Giving her a picture, which she seizes eagerly.
Countess.
   Indeed, indeed it is!

 After gazing mournfully on it.
   Retire, I pray thee, nor, till morning break,
   Return again, for I must be alone.
 Exit Sophera.

 After gazing again on the picture. 

   Alas! that lip, that eye, that arching brow;
   That thoughtful look which I have often mark'd,
   So like my noble father!

 Kissing it.
   This for his dear, dear sake, and this for thine:
   Ye sleep i' the dust together.—
   Alas! how sweetly mantled thus thy cheek
   At sight of those thou lovedst!—What things have been
   What hours, what years of trouble have gone by,
   Since thus in happy careless youth thou wast
   Dearest and nearest to my simple heart.


 Kisses it again, and presses it to her breast, while Garcio , who has entered behind by a concealed door at the bottom of the stage, comes silently upon her, and she utters a scream of surprise.
Gar.
   This is thy rest, then, and the quiet sleep
   That should restore thy health: thou giv'st these hours
   To the caressing of a minion's image
   Which to a faithful husband are denied.
   Oh, oh! they but on morning vapour tread,
   Who ground their happiness on woman's faith.
   Some reptile too!

 Stamping on the ground.
   A paltry, worthless minion!

Countess.
   Ha! was it jealousy so much disturb'd thee?
   If this be so, we shall be happy still.
   The love I bear the dead, dear though it be,
   Surely does thee no wrong.

Gar.
   No, artful woman! give it to my hand.

 Snatching at the picture.
   That is the image of a living gallant.

Countess.
   O would it were!

 Gives it to him, and he, starting as he looks upon it, staggers back some paces, till he is arrested by the pillar of the bed, against which he leans in a kind of stupor, letting the picture fall from his hands.
   Merciful God! he's guilty!—am I thus?
   Heav'n lend me strength! I'll be in doubt no longer.

 Running up to him, and clasping her hands together.


 
   Garcio, a fearful thing is in my mind,
   And curse me not that I have harbour'd it,
   If that it be not so.—The wretched Baldwin,
   Upon his death-bed, in his frenzied ravings,
   Accused thee as the murderer of my brother:
   O pardon me that such a monstrous tale
   Had any power to move me!—Look upon me!
   Say that thou didst it not, and I'll believe thee.

 A pause.
   Thou dost not speak. What fearful look is that?
   That blanching cheek! that quiv'ring lip!—O horrible!

 Catching hold of his clothes.
   Open thy lips! relieve me from this misery!
   Say that thou didst not do it.

 He remains silent, making a rueful motion of the head.
   O God! thou didst, thou didst!

 Holds up her hands to heaven in despair, and then, recoiling from him to a distant part of the chamber, stands gazing on him with horror. Garcio , after great agitation, begins to approach her irresolutely.
   I've shared thy love, been in thy bosom cherish'd,
   But come not near me! touch me not! the earth
   Yawning beneath my feet will shelter me
   From thine accursed hand.

Gar.
                                            O Margaret!
   Can gentlest love to such fierce detestation
   Be in an instant changed, for one sad deed,
   The hasty act of a most horrid moment,
   When hell and strong temptation master'd me?
   And yet why marvel? for thou canst not more
   Detest that deed than I, the wretched doer.

Countess.
   Ah, ah! why didst thou?

Gar.
                                            Listen to my story.
   But, oh! the while, unfasten from my face
   Those looks of horror, else I cannot tell it.

Countess.
   Speak then, I hear thee.

Gar.
   Thou knowst too well with what fierce pride Ulrico
   Refused, on thy behalf, my suit of love;
   Deeming a soldier, though of noble birth,
   E'en his own blood, possessing but his arms
   And some slight wreaths of fame, a match unmeet
   For one whom lords of princely territory
   Did strive to gain:—and here, indeed, I own
   He rightly deem'd; my suit was most presumptuous.

Countess.
   Well, pass this o'er;—I know with too much pride
   He did oppose thy suit.

Gar.
   That night! It was in dreary, dull November,
   When at the close of day, with faithful Baldwin,
   I reach'd this castle with the vain intent
   To make a last attempt to move his pity.
   I made it, and I fail'd. With much contempt
   And aggravating passion, he dismiss'd me
   To the dark night.

Countess.
   You left him then? You left him?

Gar.
   O yes! I left him. In my swelling breast
   My proud blood boil'd. Through the wild wood I took
   My darkling way. A violent storm arose;
   The black dense clouds pour'd down their torrents on me;
   The roaring winds aloft with the vex'd trees
   Held strong contention, whilst my buffeted breast
   The crushing tangled boughs and torn-up shrubs
   Vainly opposed. Cross lay the wild'ring paths.
   I miss'd the road; and after many turnings,
   Seeing between the trees a steady light,
   As from a window gleam, I hasten'd to it.
   It was a lower window, and within,
   The lighted chamber showed me but too well,
   We had unwittingly a circuit made
   Back to the very walls from whence we came.

Countess.
   Ah, fated, fatal error! most perverse!

Gar.
   But, oh! what feelings, thinkst thou, rose within me?
   What thoughts, what urging thoughts, what keen suggestions
   Crowded upon me like a band of fiends,
   When, on a nearer view, within the chamber,
   Upon an open couch, alone and sleeping,
   I saw Ulrico?

Countess.
   Didst thou slay him sleeping?
   The horrible deed!—Thou couldst not! O thou couldst not!

Gar.
   Well mayst thou say it! I've become, sweet Margaret,
   Living, though most unworthy as I was,
   Companion of thy virtues, one, whose heart
   Has been to good affections form'd and bent;
   But then it was not so.—My hapless youth
   In bloody, savage, predatory war
   Was rear'd. It was no shock to my rude childhood
   To see whole bands of drunk or sleeping men
   In cold blood butcher'd. Could I tell to thee
   The things that I have seen: things, too, in which
   My young hand took its part; thou wouldst not wonder,
   That, seeing thus my enemy in my power,
   Love, fortune, honours, all within the purchase
   Of one fell stroke, I raised my arm and gave it.

Countess.
   Fearful temptation!

Gar.
   After a fearful pause, I softly enter'd.
   The deed was done; and, hastening from the chamber
   With breathless speed back to the spot where Baldwin
   Held my brave steed, I mounted, favour'd now
   By a new-risen moon and waning storm;
   And to the fleetness of that noble creature
   I owe it, that though heir to him I slew,
   No whisper of suspicion upon me
   E'er breathed as perpetrator of the deed.

Countess.
   And I have been the while thy bosom's mate,


 
   Pressing in plighted love the bloody hand
   That slew my brother!

Gar.
                                            Thou, indeed, hast been
   An angel pure, link'd to a fiend. Yet, think not
   I have enjoy'd what guilt so deep had earn'd.
   Oh no! I've borne about, where'er I went,
   A secret wretchedness within my breast
   Turning delight to torment. Now thou knowest
   Why on my midnight couch thou'st heard me oft
   Utter deep groans, when thou, waked from thy sleep,
   Hast thought some nightmare press'd me.
   Oh! were the deed undone, not all the diff'rence
   Of sublunary bliss that lies between
   A world's proud monarch and the loathliest wretch
   That gleans subsistence from the fetid dunghill,
   Would tempt me to embrue my hands in murder.


 Speaking these last words loudly and vehemently.
Countess.
   Hush! speak not thus! thou'lt be o'erheard: some list'ner
   Is at the door. I thought I heard a noise.


 Going to the door, opening it, then shutting it softly and returning. No; there is nothing: 'twas my fears deceived me.
Gar.
   And dost thou fear for me? Are there within thee
   Still some remains of love for one so guilty?
   Thou wilt not then, in utter detestation,
   Heap curses on my head.

Countess.
   Guilty as thou hast been, I cannot curse thee.
   O no! I'll nightly from my cloister'd cell
   Send up to pitying heaven my prayers for thee.

Gar.
   Thy cloister'd cell! What mean those threat'ning words?

Countess.
   Garcio, we must part.

Gar.
   No; never! Any punishment but this!
   We shall not part.

Countess.
   We must, we must! 'Twere monstrous, 'twere unholy
   Longer to live with thee.

Gar.
   No, Margaret, no! Thinkst thou I will indeed
   Submit to this, e'en cursed as I am?
   No; were I black as hell's black fiends, and thou
   Pure as celestial spirits and so thou art,
   Still thou art mine; my sworn, my wedded love,
   And still as such I'll hold thee.

Countess.
   Heav'n bids us part: yea, nature bids us part.

Gar.
   Heav'n bids us part! Then let it send its lightning
   To strike me from thy side. Let yawning earth,
   Op'ning beneath my feet, divide us. Then,
   And not till then, will I from thee be sever'd.

Countess.
   Let go thy terrible grasp: thou wouldst not o'er me
   A dreaded tyrant rule? Beneath thy power
   Thou mayst indeed retain me, crush'd, degraded,
   Watching in secret horror every glance
   Of thy perturbed eye, like a quell'd slave,
   If this suffice thee; but each tie of love—
   All sympathy between us now is broken
   And lost for ever.

Gar.
   And canst thou be so ruthless? No, thou canst not!
   Let heav'n in its just vengeance deal with me!
   Let pain, remorse, disease, and every ill
   Here in this world of nature be my portion!
   And in the world of spirits too well I know
   The murd'rer's doom abides me.
   Is this too little for thy cruelty?
   No; by the living God! on my curst head
   Light every ill but this! We shall not part.

Countess.
   Let go thy desp'rate hold, thou desp'rate man!
   Thou dost constrain me to an oath as dreadful;
   And by that awful name—

Gar.
                                            Forbear, forbear!
   Then it must be; there is no mitigation.


 Throws himself on the ground, uttering a deep groan, when Rovani and Sophera burst in upon them from opposite sides.
Rov.

 to the Countess .
   What is the matter? Hath he on himself
   Done some rash act? I heard him loud and stormy.

Soph.
   She cannot answer thee: look to the count,
   And I will place her gently on her couch;
   For they are both most wretched.


 Sophera supports the Countess, while Rovani endeavours to raise Garcio from the ground, and the scene closes.
SCENE III.
The inside of a rustic hermitage; the hermit discovered marking a figure on the wall.
Hermit.
   This day to all the lonely days here spent;
   Making a term of thirty years' repentance
   For forty years of sin. Heav'n of its mercy
   Accept the sacrifice! Who knocks without?

 Knocking at the door.
   'Tis nothing but my fancy. Break of day
   Yet scarcely peeps, nor hath a new-waked bird
   Chirp'd on my branchy roof.

 Knocking again.
                                            Nay, something does.
   Lift up the latch, whoe'er thou art; nor lock
   Nor bar, nor any hind'rance e'er prevents
   Those who would enter here.


Enter Rovani.
Rov.
   O pardon, holy hermit, this intrusion
   At such untimely hour; for misery
   Makes free with times and seasons.



 
Hermit.
   Thou sayest well: it will doff ceremony
   E'en in a monarch's court. Sit down, I pray:
   I am myself a poor repentant sinner,
   But, as I trust, a brand saved from the fire.
   Then tell thy tale, and give thy sorrows vent:
   What can I do for myself entreat thy pity

Rov.
   I do not for myself entreat thy pity
   But I am come from an unhappy man,
   Who, inly torn with agony of mind,
   Hath need of ghostly aid.

Hermit.
                                            I am no priest.

Rov.
   I know thou art not, but far better, father,
   For that which I entreat thee:
   The cowled monk, in peaceful cloisters bred,
   Who hath for half a cent'ry undisturb'd
   Told o'er his beads; what sympathy hath he
   For perturb'd souls, storm-toss'd i' the wicked world?
   Therefore Count Garcio most desires to see thee,
   And will to thee alone unlock his breast.

Hermit.
   Garcio, the lord of this domain?

Rov.
                                            The same.

Hermit.
   The blest in love, the rich, the prosp'rous Garcio?

Rov.
   He hath since dead of night traversed his chamber
   Like one distraught, or cast him on the ground
   In all the frantic violence of despair.
   I have watch'd by him, but from thee alone
   He will hear words of counsel or of peace.
   Thy voice, perhaps, will calm a stormy spirit
   That ne'er has known control.

Hermit.
                                            God grant it may!
   We'll lose no time, my son; I follow thee.


 Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
An ante-room ; Rovani discovered pacing to and fro.
Rov.
   Their conference is long. The gentle hermit
   Has had, I fear, no easy task.—He comes!
Enter Hermit.

   Save thee, good father! hath thy shriving sped?
   How is thy penitent?

Hermit.
   Better, I hope: may heav'n preserve his mind
   In the meek frame in which I left it! Never,
   In all my intercourse with wretched sinners,
   Have I with a more keen ungovern'd spirit
   Stronger contention held.

Rov.
                                            I well believe thee:
   For I have seen ere now his spirit strive
   In all the restless energy of passion.
   Thou hast at last subdued him?

Hermit.
   Thank God, I have! Meek and resign'd to heav'n
   He now appears. But go to him, my son;
   He needs thy presence much. Within an hour
   He leaves the castle,—leaves his wife and child;
   It is not fit that he should be alone.
   Go, good Rovani, and with soothing words
   Keep thou his resolution to the bent.

Rov.
   Ah! such a resolution! Heard I right?
   To leave his wife and child?

Hermit.
   Question me not, my son; there is good cause:
   'Tis meet that he should go.

Rov.
                                            Forgive me, father!
   That solemn voice and sorrowing eye too well
   Asserts there is a cause,—a fearful cause.
   I will obey thee.

 Going, but returns again.
   Is there aught further thou wouldst have me do?

Hermit.
   He will, perhaps, desire to see his lady;
   But till he be prepared to leave the castle,
   And take his last farewell, methinks 'twere better
   They should not meet.

Rov.
                                            I understand you, father.


 Exeunt severally.
SCENE II.
The apartment of the Countess, who is discovered sitting on a low seat, her elbows resting on her lap, and her face covered with her clasped hands. She raises her head suddenly, listens for a moment, and then springs from her seat.
Countess.
   I am not now deceived.

 Goes to the door and listens, then returns.
                                            I heard his steps,—
   Yea, and his voice,—and it was nothing. Ah!
   My mind and senses so confused are grown,
   That all this wretchedness seems like a dream;
   A dream, alas! from which there is no waking.
   I hear him now: it is a distant step:
   I may be yet deceived.

 Going near the door, and listening again.
                                            It is, it is!
   Heav'n give me strength! my trial is at hand!


Enter Garcio , who approaches her, and then stopping short, gazes at her sadly, while she stands with her eyes fixed on the ground.
Gar.
   Marg'ret, I thought—I hoped—I hoped—I was persuaded
   The farewell yearnings of a broken heart
   Would move thee to some pity of my state;
   But that averted face, that downcast eye,—
   There is abhorrence in it.

Countess.
   O no! I fear'd to look; 'tis not abhorrence.


 Raises her eyes to him, and shrinks back.
Gar.
   What moves thee thus?



 
Countess.
                                            Alas! thou'rt greatly alter'd:
   So pale thy cheek, thine eyes so quench'd and sunk!
   Hath one short night so changed thee?

Gar.
   A night spent in the tossings of despair,
   When the fierce turmoil of contending passions
   To deepest self-abasement and contrition,
   Sabside;—a night in which I have consented
   To tear my bosom up—to rend in twain
   Its dearest, only ties—ay, such a night
   Works on the mortal frame the scath of years.

Countess.
   Alas! thy frame will feel, I fear, too soon
   The scath of years. Sorrow and sickness then
   Will bow thee down, while cold unkindly strangers
   Neglect thy couch, nor give thee needful succour.

Gar.
   And wherefore grieve for this? So much the better:
   They least befriend the wretched who retard
   The hour of his relcase.—Why should I live
   If heav'n accept my penitence? Hath earth
   Aught still to raise a wish, or gleam the path
   Of one so darken'd round with misery?

Countess.
   Nay, say not so: thy child, thy boy, to see him
   In strength and stature grown,—would not this tempt thee
   To wish some years of life?

Gar.
   Others shall rear him; others mark his change
   From the sweet cherub to the playful boy;
   Shall, with such pity as an orphan claims,
   Share in his harmless sports and catch his love;
   While I, if that I live and am by heav'n
   Permitted, coming as a way-worn stranger,
   At distant intervals, to gaze upon him,
   And strain him to my heart, shall from his eye
   The cold and cheerless stare of wonderment
   Instead of love receive.

Countess.
   O think not so! he shall be taught to love thee;
   He shall be taught to lisp thy name, and raise
   His little hands to heav'n for blessings on thee
   As one most dear, though absent.

Gar.
   I do believe that thou wilt teach him so.
   I know that in my lonely state of penitence,
   Sever'd from earthly bliss, I to thy mind
   Shall be like one whom death hath purified.
   O that, indeed, or death or any suff'rings,
   By earthly frame or frameless spirit endured,
   Could give me such a nature as again
   Might be with thine united!
   Could I but forward look and trust to this,
   Whatever suff'rings of a lengthen'd life
   Before me lay, would be to me as nothing;
   As the rough billows of some stormy frith,
   Upon whose further shore fair regions smile;
   As the rent shroudings of a murky cloud,
   Through which the mountain traveller, as he bends
   His mantled shoulders to the pelting storm,
   Sees sunny brightness peer. Could I but think—

Countess.
   Think it! believe it! with a rooted faith,
   Trust to it surely. Deep as thy repentance,
   Aspiring be thy faith!

Gar.
                                            Ay, were my faith
   Strong as my penitence, 'twere well indeed.
   My scourge and bed of earth would then be temper'd
   Almost to happiness.

Countess.
   Thy scourge and bed of earth! alas, alas!
   And meanst thou then to wreak upon thyself
   Such cruel punishment? O no, my Garcio!
   God doth accept the sorrow of the heart
   Before all studied penance. 'Tis not well:
   Where'er thou art, live thou with worthy men,
   And as becomes thy state.

Gar.
   No; when from hence a banish'd man I go;
   I'll leave behind me all my crime did purchase.
   Deprived of thee, its first and dearest meed,
   Shall I retain its base and paltry earnings
   To live with strangers more regarded? No;
   Poor as I was when first my luckless steps
   This fatal threshold pass'd,—I will depart.

Countess.
   And wilt thou then a houseless wand'rer be?
   Shall I, in warm robe wrapp'd, by winter fire
   List to the pelting blast, and think the while
   Of thy unshelter'd head?—
   Or eat my bread in peace, and think that Garcio—
   Reduce me not to such keen misery.


 Bursting into an agony of tears.
Gar.
   And dost thou still feel so much pity for me?
   Retain I yet some portion of thy love?
   O, if I do! I am not yet abandon'd
   To utter reprobation.

 Falling at her feet, and embracing her knees.
   Margaret! wife!
   May I still call thee by that name so dear?

Countess

 disentangling herself from his hold, and removing to some distance .
   O, leave me, leave me! for heav'n's mercy leave me!

Gar.

following her, and bending one knee to the ground .
   Marg'ret, beloved wife! keenly beloved!

Countess.
   Oh, move me not! forbear, forbear in pity!
   Fearful, and horrible, and dear thou art!
   Both heaven and hell are in thee! Leave me then,—
   Leave me to do that which is right and holy.

Gar.
   Yes, what is right and holy thou shalt do;
   Stain'd as I am with blood,—with kindred blood,
   How could I live with thee? O do not think
   I basely seek to move thee from thy purpose.


 
   O, no! Farewell, most dear and honoured Marg'ret!
   Yet, ere I go, couldst thou without abhorrence—


 Pauses.
Countess.
   What wouldst thou, Garcio?

Gar.
   If but that hand beloved were to my lips
   Once more in parting press'd, methinks I'd go
   With lighten'd misery.—Alas! thou canst not!
   Thou canst not to such guilt—

Countess.
                                            I can! I will!
   And heaven in mercy pardon me this sin,
   If sin it be.


 Embraces him, and after weeping on his neck, breaks suddenly away and exit, while Garcio stands gazing after her.
Gar.
   Have I not seen my last?—I've seen my last.
   Then wherefore wait I here?—
   The world before me lies.—a desert world,
   In which a banish'd wand'rer I must be.

 A pause.
   Wander from hence, and leave her so defenceless
   In these unruly times! I cannot do it!
   I'll seem to go, yet hover near her still,
   Like spell-bound spirit near th' embalmed dust
   It can no more reanimate. Mine eyes
   May see her distant form, mine ears may hear
   Her sweet voice through the air, while she believes
   Kingdoms or seas divide us.
   The hermit is my friend, to him I'll go.
   Rest for the present, eager crowding thoughts!
   I must not linger here.


 Exit.
SCENE III.
An outer court of the castle; an arched gateway in front with a stone bench on one side of it.

Enter Ludovico, Gauvino , and Pietro , and seat themselves on the bench.
Gau.
   The ev'ning breeze will cool us better here.

Lud.
   After the sultry day it is refreshing.

Pie.

 to Gauvino .
   Well, as I was a-saying to the seneschal,
   I wonder that the count should think of choosing
   That noodle Gomez to attend upon him.

Gau.
   He has some reason for it, be assured

Lud.
   How so, good chamberlain?

Gau.
   Heaven knows! but this fantastical Rovani,
   Whom as his deputy he leaves behind,
   Already takes upon him, by my faith!
   As if his kingdom were to last for ever.

Lud.
   Thou speakst in spleen; he seems to me right gracious.

Gau.
   I say not in the way of tyranny
   He takes upon him; 'tis his very graciousness,
   His condescending vanity I hate.
   A vain, assuming coxcomb! E'en when Garcio
   Frown'd like a master o'er us, yet my heart
   Acknowledged him as such, and loved him oft
   The better for his sternness.

Lud.
   Didst thou? I'm sure full many a time and oft
   Thou'st grumbled like a fiend, whene'er his orders,
   Too roughly given, have cross'd thy wiser will.

Gau.
   Well, well; perhaps I have! yet, ne'ertheless,
   Would he were with us still!

Pie.
                                            Ay, would he were!

Lud.
   Perhaps he'll soon return.

Gau.

 significantly .
   He'll ne'er return.—We'll see him here no more.

Lud.
   Why sayst thou so?

Gau.
   I have my reasons: he hath been too prosperous.

Pie.
   And what of that?

Gau.
                                            The power that has upheld him,
   Will, when his term is up, dire reck'ning take.

Pie.
   What dost thou mean?

Gau.
                                            Nay, if thou canst not guess,
   I will not utter more.

Lud.
                                            Ha! yonder Gomez comes!

Pie.
   Gomez, indeed!


 All rising to meet him.
Lud.
                                            His lord is then return'd.


Enter Gomez.
Omnes.
   Return'd already, man! Where is thy master?

Lud.
   Is he not with thee?

Gomez.
   I would he were. I left him some leagues hence;
   By his command charged to return again,
   And follow him no more. Long I entreated
   To be permitted still to share his fate,
   But was at last constrain'd to leave him.

Gau.
                                            Ha!
   Constrain'd! 'tis very strange. Where didst thou leave him?

Gomez.
   In the dark centre of a gloomy forest,
   Dismounting, to my care he gave his steed,
   And, as I said before, so strictly charged me,
   I was constrain'd to leave him.

Gau.
                                            A dark forest?

Lud.
   Sawst thou where he went?

Gomez.
   He turn'd away, and I with heavy cheer—

Gau.

 very eagerly .
   Didst thou not look behind thee in retreating
   To see what path he took?

Gomez.
                                            I look'd behind,
   But in a moment lost him from my sight.

Gau.

 shaking his head .
   'Tis marvellous strange!
   Was there nor pit, nor cave, nor flood at hand?

Gomez.
   Not that I noticed. Why dost shake thy head?

Gau.
   He'll never more upon this earth be seen.
   Whether or cave, or gulf, or flood received him,
   He is, ere this, I fear, beneath the earth


 
   Full deep enough, reck'ning with him who bought him.

Pie.
   Reck'ning with him who bought him! Be there then
   Such fearful compacts with the wicked power?

Gau.
   Have ye not heard of John the Prosperous,
   Who, starting at the sound of piping winds,
   That burst his chamber door, full sore aghast,
   With trembling steps his gorgeous chamber left,
   And, by himself in a small boat embark'd,
   Steering his way to the black wheeling eddy
   In centre of the lake, which swallow'd him?

Pie.
   My flesh creeps at the thought?

Gomez.
                                            Dost thou believe it?

Gau.
   Ay; or what think ye of the Count Avergo,
   Who, after years of such successful crimes,
   Took leave of all his friends, at warning given
   By sound of midnight trumpet at his gate;
   Round which, 'tis said, a band of plumed spectres,
   Whose whiten'd bony jaws and eyeless sockets
   Did from their open'd beavers to the moon
   Stare horribly, stood ready to receive him?

Omnes.
   And went he with them?

Gau.
   Ay, certes, did he! for above the ground
   With mortal men he never more was seen.

 To Gomez. 
   But enter, man, and have a stoup of wine;
   Thou seemest faint and spent.

Omnes.
   Ay, give him wine, for see how pale he is.

Pie.
   Like one who hath been near unearthly things.


 Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
The garden.

Enter the Countess and Sophera.
Soph.

 speaking as they enter .
   And look, I pray, how sweet and fresh and fragrant
   The dewy morning is. There, o'er our heads
   The birds conven'd like busy gossips sit,
   Trimming their speckled feathers. In the thick
   And tufted herbage, with a humming noise
   Stirs many a new-waked thing; among the grass
   Beetles, and lady-birds, and lizards glide,
   Showing their shining coats like tinted gold.

Countess.
   Yes, all things, in a sunny morn like this,
   That social being have and fellowship
   With others of their kind, begin the day
   Gladly and actively. Ah! how wakes he,
   His day of lonesome silence to begin,
   Who, of all social intercourse bereft,
   On the cold earth hath pass'd the dismal night?
   Cheerful domestic stir, nor crowing cock,
   Nor greeting friend, nor fawning dog hath he
   To give him his good-morrow.

Soph.
   Nay, do not let your fancy brood on this.
   Think not my lord, though he with Gomez parted
   In a lone wood, will wander o'er the earth
   In dreary solitude. In every country
   Kind hearts are found to cheer the stranger's way.

Countess.
   Heaven grant he meet with such!

Soph.
   Then be not so cast down. Last night the air
   Was still and pleasant; sweetly through the trees,
   Which moved not, look'd the stars and crescent moon:
   The night-bird's lengthen'd call with fitful lapse,
   And the soft ceaseless sound of distant rills
   Upon the list'ning ear came soothingly;
   While the cool freshness of the air was mix'd
   With rising odours from the flowery earth.
   In such sweet summer nights, be well assured
   The unhoused head sleeps soundest.

Countess.
   The unhoused head! and Garcio's now is such!
   I could not sleep; and, as I paced my chamber,
   Alas! thought I, how long a term is night
   To lonely watchers! e'en a summer's night.
   And in the lengthen'd gloom of chill December—
   Why dost thou move?

Soph.
                                            There is a stranger coming.

Countess.
   Perhaps it is some message from my lord.

Soph.
   I rather fear it is Tortona's lord.

Countess.
   I wish my gate had not been open'd to him.
   Will he persist to press his presence on me?


Enter Tortona.
Tor.
   Pardon me, madam, this too bold intrusion,
   But hov'ring round your walls, like the poor moth
   Circling the fatal flame, I needs must enter.
   I was compell'd to do it. May I hope
   I see you well as lovely, and inclined,
   From the angelic sweetness of your nature,
   To pardon me?

Countess.
   You still preserve, my lord, I do perceive,
   The bountiful profusion of a tongue
   Well stored with courteous words.

Tor.
                                            Nay, rather say,
   A tongue that is of all expression beggar'd,
   That can the inward sentiments declare
   Which your angelic presence still inspires.

 Pointing to Sophera. 
   This lady knows how deep, how true they are.
   She did refuse, yet, ne'ertheless, I trust
   She bore my secret message to your ear.

Soph.
   'Twas well for you I did not, good my lord;
   You had not else, I trow, found entrance here.

Countess.
   It had, in truth, prevented this presumption.
   A secret message, saidst thou, for the ear
   Of Garcio's wife!

Tor.
                                            And does the man who quits thee,—


 
   Like a dull dolt such heavenly beauty quits,—
   Deserve the name of husband? No, sweet Marg'ret;
   Gloze not to me thy secret wrongs: I know,
   Full well I know them; nor shall formal names
   And senseless ties my ardent love repel.


 Catching hold of her hand.
Countess

 shaking him off .
   Base and audacious fool! did not thy folly
   Almost excuse thy crime, thou shouldst most dearly
   Repent this insult. Thinkest thou my lord
   Has left me unprotected?—Ho! Rovani!
   Move with a quicker step.
Enter Rovani , followed by Gonzalos.


 To Tortona , pointing to Rovani. 
   Behold, my lord, the friend of absent Garcio,
   And in his absence holder of this castle.
   To his fair courtesy, as it is meet,
   I now consign you with all due respect;
   And so farewell.


 Exit, followed by Sophera.
Tor.
   I might, indeed, have known that modern dames
   An absent husband's substitute can find
   Right speedily.

Rov.

 aside to Gonzalos .
   Jealous of me, I hear.
   It makes my soldier's plume more proudly wave
   To think such fancies twitch him.

 Aloud to Tortona , advancing to meet him.
                                            Noble marquis!
   Proud of the lady's honourable charge.
   That to my care entrusts a guest so valued,
   Let me entreat you to partake within
   Some slight refreshment. After such fatigue,
   So early and so gallantly encounter'd,
   Two leagues at least upon an ambling steed
   Your morning's hardships fairly may be reckon'd,
   You must require refreshment.

Tor.
                                            Paltry coxcomb!

Rov.
   Yes, paltry as a coxcomb. good my lord,
   Compared to greater. Pardon a deficiency
   Your presence has occasion'd, and permit
   That I conduct you—

Tor.
                                            Most contemptible!
   Follow me not! My way from this curst place
   I'll find without a guide.

Rov.
                                            Then be it so.
   If it so please you: and, farewell, my lord,
   Until within these walls you shall again
   Vouchsafe to honour us.

Tor.
   Which may be, jeering minion, somewhat sooner
   Than thou dost reckon for.

Rov.
   Whene'er you will, we're ready to receive you.

 Exit Tortona.
   He calls me minion: seest thou not, Gonzalos,
   Which way suspicion leans? The fool is jealous,—
   Jealous of me! Hath any one besides
   Harbour'd such foolish fancies?

Gon.
   No, by St. Francis! ne'er a soul besides
   Hath such a thought conceived, or ever will.

Rov.
   Thou'rt angry: dost thou think my thoughts are evil?

Gon.
   No; evil thoughts thrive not within thy breast,
   Valiant Rovani; this I know right well:
   But vain ones there a fatt'ning culture find,
   And reach a marv'llous growth.

Rov.
   Well, do not chide: I will with scrupulous honour
   Fulfil my trust; and do but wish my arms
   The lady and this castle might defend
   Against a worthier foe than that light braggart.

Gon.
   But thou knowst well, or ought to know, Rovani,
   A braggart may be brave. Faith! were it not
   For some small grains of wit and honest worth
   Which poor Tortona lacks, thyself and he
   In natural temper'ment and spirit are
   So nearly match'd, you might twin nestlings be
   From the same shell.—Be not so rash, I pray!
   Tortona is no coward; and his forces
   Greater than thou in ruin'd walls like these
   Canst prudently oppose: therefore be wise,
   And send for timely aid, lest he surprise thee.

Rov.
   I will be hang'd before another soldier
   Shall be admitted here.

Gon.
                                            See to it then.

Rov.
   And so I will; it is not thy concern.


 Exit Gonzalos.
Rov.

 alone .
   He, too, 'tis manifest, has some suspicion
   That Marg'ret favours me.

 Muttering, and smiling to himself, then speaking aloud.
   Ay, those same looks. Well, well, and if it be,
   It touches not our honour.—Fair advice!
   Call in some neighbouring leader of banditti
   To share the honour of defending her!
   I know his spite. Twin nestlings from the shell
   With such a fool! I know his jealous spite.
   I will be hang'd before another soldier
   Shall cross the bridge or man our moated wall.


 Exit.
ACT V. SCENE I.
The outer court of the castle. Hermit, pilgrim, and several mendicants, discovered standing round the gateway at the bottom of the stage.

Enter, on the front , Ludovico, Gauvino , and Gomez.
Gau.
   The rumour of our lady's bounteous alms
   Spreads o'er the country quickly; every morning


 
   Adds to the number of those mendicants,—
   Those slothful pests, who thus beset our gates.

Lud.
   Rail not so bitterly; there are, thou seest,
   The sick and maim'd, and truly miserable,
   Although some idle vagrants with the crowd
   Have enter'd cunningly. Dost thou not see
   Our hermit is among them?

Gau.
   What, comes he too a-begging? Shame upon him!
   His cot is stored with every dainty thing
   Our peasant housewives rear, poor simple souls!
   And prowls he here for more?

Gomez.
   He never came before.

Lud.
                                            Ay, and belike
   He rather comes to give than to receive.

Gau.
   And what hath he to give? God mend thy wit!
   A broken rosary?

Lud.
                                            A good man's blessing.

Gau.
   Pooh, pooh! what folks are wont to sell at home,
   They will not go abroad to give for nothing.

Gomez.
   And see yon aged pilgrim by his side,
   How spent and spare he seems!

Gau.
   Hovels, and caves, and lazar-houses soon
   Will pour their pests upon us.

Lud.
   Hush, man! thou art a surly heartless churl!
   Yonder the lady comes.


Enter Countess.
Mendicants

 advancing, and all speaking at once as she enters .
   Blessings upon your head, most noble lady!
Countess.
   I thank you all: have they been careful of you?

Mendicants.
   Ay, bless you! they have served us bountifully.

Countess.
   But wherefore stand ye here? Retire within,
   Where ye may sit at case and eat your morsel.
   Good pilgrim, thou art weary and lackst rest;
   I fear the hardships of thy wand'ring life
   Have blanch'd thy scanty locks more than thine years.

Pilgrim.
   No, gentle lady: heav'n provides for me.
   When ev'ning closes, still some shelt'ring cave,
   Or peasant's cot, or goatherd's shed is near;
   And, should the night in desert parts o'ertake me,
   It pleases me to think the beating blast
   Has its commission, by rough discipline
   To profit me withal.

Countess.
   The beating blasts have well fulfill'd on thee
   Their high commission.
   But, oh! exceed not! Wander forth no more.
   If thou hast home, or wife, or child, or aught
   Of human kind that loves thee, O return!
   Return to them, and end thy days in peace.
   Didst thou but know the misery of those
   Who hear the night-blast rock their walls, and think
   The head to them most dear may be unshelter'd,
   Thou couldst not be so cruel—

 Turning round. 
   Who twitch'd my robe?

Lud.
                                            It was our holy hermit,
   Who press'd, e'en now, its border to his lips,
   Then shrank aside.

Countess.
   But how is this? He hurries fast away.

Lud.
   He is a bashful man, whose hooded face
   On woman never looks.

Countess.
   Has he some vow upon him?

Lud.
   'Tis like he may; but he will pray for you.

Countess.
   And good men's prayers prevail, I do believe.

Lud.
   Ay, madam, all the peasants round, I trow,
   Set by his prayers great store. E'en mothers leave
   The very cradles of their dying infants
   To beg them. Wives, whose husbands are at sea,
   Or absent, or in any jeopardy,
   Hie to his cell to crave his intercession.

Countess.
   Do they? Most blessed man!

 Beckoning to the hermit, who stands aloof.
   I have words for thine ear; approach, I pray.

 Leading him apart, on the front of the stage.
   The absent and in jeopardy by thee
   Remember'd are, and heav'n receives thy prayers:
   Then, oh! remember one, who for himself,
   Depress'd, discouraged, may not to God's throne
   Meet supplication make!

 Taking him further apart, and in a lower voice.
   There is a lonely wand'rer in the world
   Of whom thou wottest. When the vespers sweet
   And ev'ning orisons of holy men
   Sound through the air, and in his humble cot,
   With all his family round, th' unlearn'd hind
   Lifts up his soul to heaven; when e'en the babe,
   Tutor'd to goodness, by its mother kneels
   To lisp some holy word,—on the cold ground,
   Unbleer'd of earthly thing, he'll lay him down
   Unblest, I fear, and silent. Such a one
   Thou wottest of, good father; pray for him.
   How's this? thou'rt greatly moved, and dost not answer.
   Have I requested what thou mayst not grant?
   Heav'n hath not cast him off. O do not think it!
   The heart that loved him hath not cast him off,
   And do not thou. Pray for him: God will hear thee.

 He retires from her; she still following him.
   I do entreat, I do beseech thee, father!
   I saw thy big tears glancing as they fell,
   Though shrouded be thy face. Wilt thou not speak?

Hermit

 in a disguised voice .
   I will obey thee, lady.



 
Countess

 to herself .
   He hath a strange, mistuned, and hollow voice,
   For one of so much sympathy.

 Alarm bell without.
   Ha! the alarm! What may it be? Ho! Pietro.


Enter Pietro , in haste.
Pie.
   Haste, shut the castle gates, and with all speed
   Muster our strength,—there is no time to lose.
   Madam, give orders quickly. Where's Rovani?

Countess.
   What is the matter? Why this loud alarm?

Pie.
   The Marquis of Tortona, not far distant,
   With hasty march approaches, as I guess
   Three thousand strong.


 Alarm rings again, and enter Rovani, Gonzalos , and others, from different sides.
Countess.
   Heav'n be our trust! Hearest thou this, Rovani?

Rov.
   I've heard the larum bell and strange confusion.

Countess.
   Tortona with his hostile force approaches—

 To Pietro. 
   Tell it thyself; saidst thou three thousand strong?

Pie.
   Yes, madam, so I did compute his numbers;
   And with him, too, one of those horrid engines
   So lately known, which from its roaring mouth
   Sends horrible destruction.
   Not two leagues off I met him in array
   Skirting the forest; and through dell and stream,
   Fast as my feet could bear me, I have run
   To give you notice.

Countess.
   Heaven aid the weak! I fear our slender force
   Will be as nothing 'gainst such fearful odds.
   What thinkest thou, Rovani? for on thee
   Our fate depends.

Rov.
                                            Fear not, my noble mistress!
   I will defend you. In your service bold,
   Each of your men will ten men's strength possess.
   Withdraw, then, I entreat you, to your tower,
   And these good folks dismiss.
 Pointing to the mendicants that still remain.

 Exeunt Countess and all the mendicants except the hermit, who retires to a corner of the stage.


Gon.

 advancing to Rovani on the front .
   Rovani, be thou bold, yet be not rash.
   I warn'd thee well of this; but let that pass:
   Only be wiser now. There is a leader
   Of bold condottieri, not far distant;
   Send to him instantly: there may be time.

Rov.
   I will not: we can well defend these walls
   'Gainst greater odds; and I could swear that coward
   Has number'd, in his fright, Tortona's soldiers
   Threefold beyond the truth. Go to thy duty:
   Muster the men within, while I, meantime,
   From place to place all needful orders give.


 Exeunt Gonzalos and Rovani severally, while many people cross the stage in hurry and confusion , Rovani calling to them sometimes on one side, sometimes on another, as he goes off.
Gomez

 to Ludovico , following Rovani with his eye .
   A brave man this, and gives his orders promptly.

Lud.
   Ay; brave enough, but rash. Alack the day!
   Would that our valiant lord were here himself,
   His own fair dame and castle to defend.
   Alas! that evil deed e'er stain'd his hand,—
   If this were so: we'll see his like no more.

Hermit

 going close to Ludovico .
   Fear not, good man, who lov'st thy hapless lord;
   Give me thine ear.


 Whispers to him.
Lud.

 aside to hermit .
   Conceal thee in that tower!

Hermit.
   Hush, hush! and come with me: I will convince thee
   That what I ask is for thy lady's good.


 Exeunt, hermit leading off Ludovico from Gomez.
SCENE II.
The great hall of the castle.

Enter the Countess, meeting Sophera ; a confused noise heard without, and a discharge of cannon.
Countess.
   What sawst thou from the turrets, for thy face
   Looks pale and terrified? The din increases;
   They have not made a breach?

Soph.
   I hope they have not; but that fearful engine
   Is now against our weakest buttress pointed.

 Cannon heard again.
   It roars again; have mercy on us, heaven!
   How the walls shake, as if an earthquake rock'd them!

Countess.
   My child, my child! I'll to the lowest vaults
   Convey him instantly.

Soph.
   But you forget th' attack is still directed
   Against the eastern side; here he is safe.

Countess.
   And may th' Almighty ever keep him so!


 Cannon without.
Soph.
   Again the horrible roar!

Countess.
   Our ruin'd walls are weak, our warriors few:
   Should they effect a breach!—O Garcio, Garcio!
   Where wand'rest thou, unblest, unhappy man,
   Who hadst our safeguard been!
Enter Pietro.

   Ha! bringst thou tidings?

Pie.
                                            Ay, and fearful tidings.
   The foe have made a breach, and through the moat,


 
   Now grown so shallow with the summer drought,
   Have made their way.

Countess.
                                            Where does Rovani fight?

Pie.
   He did fight in the breach most valiantly;
   But now the foemen o'er his body pass,
   For he is slain, and all, I fear, is lost.

Countess.
   It must not be: I'll to the walls myself;
   My soldiers will with desperate courage fight,
   When they behold their wretched mistress near.

Soph.

 endeavouring to prevent her .
   O, madam, do not go!
   Alas, alas! our miserable fate!

Countess.
   Restrain me not with senseless lamentations;
   Driven to this desp'rate state, what is my choice?
   For now I must be bold, or despicable.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
The ramparts. Women discovered looking down from one of the lower battlements of the castle; the din and clashing of arms heard without, as if close at hand; then Tortona and his soldiers cross the stage, fighting with the soldiers of the castle.
 st woman.
   See, there! see how our noble lady stands,
   And bravely cheers them!

 d woman .
   If they have any soul or manhood in them,
   They'll fight like raging lions for her sake.

Gon.

 without .
   Fie, fie! give way before your lady's eyes!

 st woman.
   Ay, brave Gonzalos there right nobly strives;
   But all in vain,—the enemy advance;
   They gain the pass, and our base varlets yield.

 Voice without. 
   Bear in the lady there; 'tis desperation!

 d voice without. 
   Resistance now is vain; bear in the lady!

 d voice without. 
   A miracle! a miracle!

 st woman.
   What is't? Why call they out a miracle?

 d woman.
   Hast thou not eyes to see? Upon our side
   The hermit combats, coiling round one arm
   His twisted garments, whilst the other wields
   A monstrous brand, might grace a giant's grasp.
   O brave! look how he fights! he doth not fight
   Like mortal man: heav'n sends him to our aid.

 st woman.
   And see! there is another miracle!
   See Ludovico fighting by his side!
   Who could have thought our gentle seneschal
   Had pith and soul enough to fight so bravely?

 d woman.
   See, see! the vile Tortonians stand aghast:
   They turn, they fly!


 Loud shouts heard without, and re-enter Tortona and his party, pursued by the soldiers of the castle, led on by the hermit.
Hermit.
   Turn, valiant chieftain! the most gen'rous foe
   Of dames, whose lords are absent; turn, for shame!
   Do not disgrace thy noble enterprise
   With wounds received behind. Whate'er their cause,
   Tortona's lords have still been soldiers. Turn,
   Or be the scorn of every beardless boy,
   Whose heart beats at the sound of warlike coil.
   Thou canst not fear a man unhelm'd, unmail'd?

Tor.
   No; if a man thou art, I fear thee not!

Hermit.
   Well, to it, then, and prove me flesh and blood.

Tor.
   Whate'er thou art, I'll bear thy scorn no longer.


 Exeunt, fighting furiously.
SCENE IV.
The great hall: a shouting heard without.

Enter Pietro , calling as he enters.
Pie.
   Where is the countess?


Enter Sophera , by the opposite side.
Soph.
   Thy voice calls gladly; dost thou bring good tidings?

Pie.
   I do; but stop me not! Where is the countess?


Enter Countess in haste.
Countess.
   What joyful shouts were those? My soldiers' voices!
   Some happy chance has changed the fate of battle.

Pie.
   Ay, changed most happily.

Countess.
                                            And heaven be praised!
   How has it been, good Pietro? Tell me quickly.

Pie.
   When we were panic-strick'n, reft of our wits,
   Treading, like senseless sheep, each other down,
   Heav'n sent us aid.

Countess.
                                            And be its goodness praised!
   So near the verge of merciless destruction,
   What blessed aid was sent?

Pie.
   By our fierce enemy, as I have said,
   So sorely press'd, a powerful voice was heard
   Calling our courage back; and on the sudden,
   As if the yawning earth had sent it up,
   A noble form, clad in the hermit's weeds,
   But fighting with such fury irresistible
   As armed warrior, no, nor mortal man
   Did ever fight, upon our side appear'd,
   Inspiring us with valour. Instantly


 
   We turn'd again on our astonish'd foe,
   Who fled to gain the breach by which they enter'd.
   Few have escaped; and by our noble hermit
   Tortona's lord is slain.

Countess

 after looking up to heaven in silent adoration .
   That mighty Arm which still protects the innocent.
   Weak woman, helpless infancy, and all
   Bereft and desolate, hath fought for us!
   But he, the blessed agent of its power,
   Our brave deliv'rer, lead me to him instantly!
   Where is the marv'llous man?

Pie.
   I left him, madam, on the eastern rampart,
   Just as Tortona fell.—See Ludovico,
   Who still fought nearest to him; he'll inform you.


Enter Ludovico.
Countess.
   Brave Ludovico!—But that woeful look,
   In such a moment of unhoped-for triumph!
   Is the brave being safe who hath preserved us?

Lud.
   Alas! e'en as we shouted at the fall
   Of proud Tortona, conquer'd by his arm;
   E'en as he stoop'd to soothe his dying foe,
   The hateful caitiff drew a hidden dagger
   And plunged it in his breast.

Countess.
   Alas, alas! and is his life the forfeit
   Of his most gen'rous aid!
   O lead me to him! let me thank and bless him,
   If yet his noble mind be sensible
   To words of gratitude.

Lud.
   They bring him hither. He himself desired
   That they should bear him to your presence. See!
   With sad slow steps they come.


Enter soldiers bearing the hermit on a low bier, and set him down near the front of the stage. The Countess stands in woeful silence till he is placed, and then throws herself at his feet, embracing them.
Countess.
   Devoted, generous man! Heav'n's blessed minister!
   Who hast, to save us from impending ruin,
   Thy life so nobly sacrificed; receive,—
   While yet thy soul hath taste of earthly things,—
   Receive my thanks, my tears, my love, my blessing;
   The yearning admiration of a heart
   Most grateful! Generous man, whoe'er thou art,
   Thy deeds have made thee blood and kindred to me.
   O that my prayers and tears could move thy God,
   Who sent such aid, to spare thy precious life!

Hermit

 uncovering his head, and discovering the face of Garcio .
   Margaret!

Countess.
                                            My Garcio!

 Throwing her arms round him for some time, then raising herself from the bier, and wringing her hands in an agony of grief.
   This is my wretched work! Heaven was his judge,
   Yet I, with cruel unrelenting sternness,
   Have push'd him on his fate. O Garcio, Garcio!

Gar.
   Do not upbraid thyself: thou hast done well:
   For no repentance e'er could make me worthy
   To live with thee, though it has made me worthy
   To die for thee.

Countess.
                                            My dear and generous Garcio!
   Alas, alas!

Gar.
                                            O calm that frantic grief!
   For had my life been spared, my dearest Margaret,
   A wand'ring banish'd wretch I must have been,
   Lonely and sad: but now, forgiven by thee,—
   For so my heart assures me that I am,—
   To breathe my parting spirit in thy presence,
   For one who has so heavily offended,
   Is a most happy end. It is so happy
   That I have faith to think my deep contrition
   Is by my God and Judge accepted now,
   Instead of years of wretchedness and penance.
   Be satisfied and cheer'd, my dearest wife!
   Heaven deals with me in mercy.
   Where is thy hand? Farewell, a long farewell!

Soph.
   See, he revives, and strives to speak again.

Gar.
   Could I but live till I have seen my child!
   It may not be: the gripe of death is here.
   Give him my dying love.
 Dies.

 Curtain drops.


RAYNER: A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Rayner .

Count Zaterloo , a worthless dissipated nobleman of ruined fortune, and chief of a band of lawless ruined men, like himself.

Bernard gentlemen and followers of Zaterloo .

Sebastian , gentleman and follower of Zaterloo .

Hardibrand , an old general.

Mardonio , a monk.

Old man of the wood.

Ohio , a negro attached to the prison.

Herman , servant to Rayner .

Richard .

Bertram .

Gobus .

Keeper of the prison, clown, executioners, turnkey, gaoler, messenger, landlord, confessor, crowd, &c.

WOMEN Elizabeth .

Countess Zaterloo , mother to Zaterloo .

Mira , a courtezan .

Alice , friend to Mira .



Scene , Germany, near the frontiers of Poland and Silesia.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A noise of voices and unruly merriment is heard, whilst the curtain draws up, and discovers Count Zaterloo, Bernard, Sebastian , and others of their band, seated round a table with wine, &c.
Zat.
   Ha, ha, ha, ha! with all this noisy mirth,
   Should some grave stranger, on his way misled,
   Now push the door ajar, and look upon us
   Thus set, what class of men should we be deem'd?
   A set of light hearts, snug in fortune's lap,
   Who will not go to bed because we may?
   Or club of sharpers, flush'd with full success,
   New from the spoiling of some simple fool?
   Or troop of strolling players, at our ease,
   After the labours of our kingly sorrows,
   With throats new cool'd at as great charge of wine
   As our tough lungs have cost of lady's tears?

Ber.
   No, no, thou hast not hit upon it yet:
   He'd take thee for the heir of some old miser,
   Treating thy friends, as first fruits of thy kingdom,
   With flowing bumpers to the quiet rest
   Of thy good kinsman's soul.

Zat.
   Yes, Bernard, thou sayst well: and thy dark visage,
   Lank and unsuited to all mirth, would mark thee
   The undertaker, who amongst the guests
   Had come on matters of his sable trade,


 
   Grinning a strange, uncomely, jaw-bone smile
   O'er the near prospect of his future gains.

Seb.
   Methinks, at least, in this gay, jolly band,
   He scarcely would discover needy men,
   Who better days have seen.

Zat.
   Tut, man! thou art too grave; thou art too grave—
   Which of you sung that song with merry lay,
   Some few nights since? Come, let us have it now.

SONG.
   Ye who fin would happy be,
   Give the hand, and join with me:
   They who toil the weary day,
   They who bend with locks of grey,
   They who tread the beaten way,
   Fools who work that we may play,
   Fold their weary arms to sleep,
   Come, let us our vigil keep.

   Fellows, join, and never fear;
   Ye who would be happy, hear.
   With the sober and the meek,
   Lighter flies the passing week?
   In his dwelling warm and sleek,
   Brighter smiles the rich man's cheek?
   Wiser things may wise men say,
   But we are wiser far than they.

   Come, light spirits, light and free,
   Wisest they who foolish be.
   He who hammers at the pot,
   He who brews for every sot,
   He who made my hose and coat,
   Is a better man I wot;
   Yet were we form'd, events declare,
   He to work and I to wear.

   Mistress of the misty shroud,
   O, lovely moon! come from thy cloud.
   When thou o'erlookst the ocean's brine,
   Ourselves we view in floods of wine.
   Our constancy resembles thine;
   Like thee in borrow'd robes we shine;
   Then let us, in thy kindred light,
   Still wake, the rulers of the night.
Zat.
   It is a song of Halbert's, is it not?
   He was a social jolly-hearted mate,
   And had a knack of making ready rhymes.

Ber.
   I knew him well: what has become of him?

Zat.

 pretending not to hear .
   Fill up your glass, and let the flask go round.

Ber.
   What has become of Halbert, dost thou know?

Zat.

 still pretending not to hear .
   This wine is richly flavour'd, is it not?

Ber.
   It is.—But Halbert; know ye aught of him?

Zat.
   The devil take thy question, asking spirit!
   For when thou getst a notion by the skirt,
   Thou, like an English bull-dog, keepst thy hold,
   And wilt not let it go.—
   He shot himself in prison some months since:
   Now, there's thine answer for thee; art thou satisfied?


 A deep and long pause; then Zaterloo starts up as if he recollected something.
   He will be with us ere I've pav'd his way.
Seb.
   Hast thou some new associate to propose?

Zat.
   Know ye the younger branch of Valvo's house?
   Whose valiant father left him but his sword
   And his proud spirit, through this changeful world
   To shape his way, with heart as truly temper'd
   To all the softest witch'ries of refinement
   As e'er own'd cherish'd heir of wide domains,
   In palace nurs'd.

Seb.
                                            I've seen him when a youth.
   But he since then has of a foreign state
   The soldier been; and had not now return'd,
   But in the hope, 'tis said, of being heir
   To his great uncle's vast and rich possessions,
   Of which that villain Hubert has depriv'd him
   With treach'rous wiles. Poor heart! he has my pity.
   'Tis said a ling'ring fever seiz'd upon him
   From disappointment; and I marvel not;
   The stroke was most severe.

Zat.
                                            And felt more keenly,
   For that he left behind him, in the country
   To which he now belongs, a gentle maid
   And his betroth'd, with whom he thought to share
   His promis'd wealth.
   But these things rest.—Thus driven as we are
   To this uncertain, daring course of life,
   The stronger and the more respectable
   Our band, the greater chance of prospering.
   Our number is too small; and, by my soul,
   To see a mean, plebeian, vulgar knave,
   Admitted of our fellowship, still rubs
   Against my nature. Such a man as Rayner
   Is precious, and, once gain'd, is sure and steadfast.
   But few days since I met him, dark and thoughtful,
   With melancholy and unwonted gait
   Slow saunt'ring through lone, unfrequented paths,
   Like one whose soul from man's observing eye
   Shrinks gall'd, as shrinks the member newly torn
   From every slightest touch. Seeing him thus,
   I mark'd him for my man.

Ber.
   Didst thou accost him?

Zat.
                                            Yes; when to my greeting,
   “Thou seest I am unhappy, go thy ways,”
   He fretful said, and turn'd. I still persisted,
   With soothing words which thrill'd against his heart,
   For in our youthful days we once were playmates,
   Like the sweet tones of some forgotten song,
   Till, like a pent-up flood swoln to the height,
   He pour'd his griefs into my breast with tears,
   Such as the manliest men in their cross'd lives
   Are sometimes forced to shed.



 
Seb.
   And spoke he of his love?

Zat.
                                            Nay, there indeed
   He was reserv'd; but that part of his story,
   Which I from sure authority have learnt,
   I still through broken words could shrewdly read,
   Although he named it not.

Ber.
   Hast thou explain'd to him our course of life?

Zat.
   No, that had been too much; but canst thou doubt,
   Suff'ring such wrongs as Hubert's artful baseness
   Has put upon him, he will scruple long,
   Thus circumstanced, to join his arm with ours
   In murd'ring the rich villain?

Ber.

 looking at Sebastian , who shrinks back .
   I pray thee call it shooting! that plain word
   Still makes Sebastian, like a squeamish dame,
   Shrink and look lily-faced. To shoot a man
   As one in battle shoots a fronted foe;
   As from the tavern's broil, in measured field,
   One shoots a friend, is nought: — but that word murder—
   It hath a horrid sound; pray thee, good captain,
   Remember 'tis a band of gentlemen
   Thou dost command, and let such gentle phrase
   Fall from thy tongue as gentle ears may suit.


 Omnes laughing loud at Sebastian .
Zat.
   Hush! Rayner is at hand, I hear his steps.
Enter Rayner.

   I give you welcome, Rayner, with my heart:
   These are my friends, of whom I well might boast,
   But that it seems like boasting of myself.
   Here, take your place, and join our fellowship.
   There is but little need of ceremony
   With those whom like misfortunes bring together.

Ray.
   I take my seat, honour'd in such a place;
   And so far to misfortune am indebted,
   Which has procur'd it for me.


 Sits down.
Ber.

 drinking to Rayner .
   This do I fill to future fellowship:
   To that which makes, at fortune's lowest ebb,
   A few brave men united, mock the world
   And all its plodding rules; enabling them
   Boldly to seize their portion of life's feast,
   Which griping av'rice or unjust oppression
   Would from them snatch, whilst with insulting scorn
   It scoffs at poverty and patient want.

Ray.
   Thou truly sayst; at least I have observ'd
   That those who bear misfortunes over meekly
   Do but persuade mankind that they and want
   Are all too fitly match'd to be disjoin'd,
   And so to it they leave them.

Ber.
                                            'Tis ever so:
   E'en good men then neglect them; but the base,
   They, who by mean and undermining arts
   To o'ergrown wealth attain, like the ass's heel
   'Gainst the sick lion's low and lanken breast,
   Spurn at them.

Zat.
   Yes, good Bernard, thou speakst truly.
   For I myself, who, as thou knowst right well,
   Am not too meekly to misfortune bent,
   Have somewhat of the worthless ass's kick
   Against my bosom felt.—'Lone and unarm'd—
   Had but one brave companion by my side
   My anger shared, full dearly had the knave—
   But let it pass,—he had a brave man's curse,
   And that will rest upon him.

Ber.
   But, pray thee, count, tell us the circumstance:
   Thou speakst in mystery.

Zat.
   A few days since, returning near my home,
   Upon a narrow path raised from a road
   With mud choked up, behind me trampling came,
   A band of liv'ried rascals at his heels,
   In all his awkward state, a puff'd-up worldling,
   And rode me off my way; whilst looking back,
   He turn'd his head with a malicious grin
   At the poor spatter'd wretch, who in the mud
   Stood showering curses on him.

Ray.
   Ay, 'tis the cursed insolence of wealth
   That makes the poor man poor. Thou wast unarm'd?

Zat.
   I was; or by this hand, poor as I am,
   I should have spent a brace of bullets on him
   With much good-will.

Ray.
                                            Knowst thou the villain's name?

Zat.
   Faith, I'm almost ashamed to tell it thee.
   Thou knowst him well: he is a rich man now;
   His name is Hubert.

Ray.
   There lives no blacker villain on the earth
   Than he who bears it.—But thou knowst it all.
   When from a distant country, where with honour
   I earn'd a soldier's pittance, the fair promises
   Of a near kinsman tempted me, and I,
   Though by my nature most incautious,
   And little skill'd to gain by flatt'ring arts
   An old man's love, high in his favour stood;
   That villain Hubert roused his jealous nature
   With artful tales of slights and heir-like wishes,
   And covert mock'ry of his feeble age,
   Till, in the bitterness of changed love,
   All his vast wealth he did bequeath to him,
   And left me here, e'en in this stranger's land
   For years of absence makes it so to me,
   A disappointed, friendless, unknown man,
   Poor and depress'd, such as you see me now.

Ber.
   Double, detested, cruel-hearted villain!

Zat.

 starting up with affected vehemence .
   By heaven he dies, as I do wear this arm!

 They all start up.
   Defended by a host of liv'ried knaves,
   I'd seek him out alone.

Ber.
   Thou shalt not go alone; here, heart and hand
   We will all join thee in so good a cause.

 st gent.
   My arm is at thy will.

 d gent.
                                            Take my aid too;
   We never can be bold in better cause.



 
 d gent.

 on receiving a sign from Zaterloo .
   Then, sirs, you must be speedy with your vengeance,
   For I am well inform'd that on to-morrow,
   With all his treasure, for a distant province
   He will begin his journey towards eve.

Zat.
   Ha! then good fortune leads him to our hands;
   How goes he guarded?

 d gent.
                                            With a slender train.

Zat.
   Then thanks to fortune's fav'ring smiles, which thus,
   Whilst we but seek revenge for a friend's wrongs,
   So kindly throws into our heedless way
   The easy cure of our necessities.
   Yes, let us seize the greedy glutted villain!
   Let us disgorge him of his ill-got gains!
   He long enough has rioted in ease,
   Whilst better men have felt the gripe of want.

Ber.
   Yes, let it be so, let the villain die!

Zat.
   What sayst thou, Rayner? thou alone art silent.

Ray.
   The wrongs are mine, and if with indignation
   They fill your breasts, in strong desire of vengeance
   Ye well may guess I am not far behind:
   But there's a law above all human bonds,
   Which damps the eager beating of my heart,
   And says, “do thou no murder.”

Zat.
   Well, clear thy knitted brows, nor look thus strangely.
   We both are form'd, my friend, to know like feelings,
   Like wants and wishes, and from better days
   Both are reduced to fortune's lowest ebb:
   And I as well as thou, standing thus singly,
   Can feed my fancy up with strong conceits
   Of what in letter'd lore is virtue term'd,
   And bear its darkest frowns. There was a time,
   When sharing ev'ry wish and ev'ry view
   With one of weaker frame and softer soul;
   Yet forced by the dark frowns of adverse fortune
   To live a willing outlaw from her presence,
   Because I could not bear to come before her
   A poor despised man, reft of that comeliness
   And honest grace which independence gives,
   To bid her throw aside her flowing robes
   And decent ornaments of maiden pride,
   Unveil the sweetness of her shelter'd beauty
   To beating mid-day heats and chilling winds,
   And be a wand'ring vagrant by my side;—
   There was a time, my friend, when, thus beset,
   At view of any means to better fortune,
   A stronger pow'r had ris'n within my breast
   And mock'd at law. But, standing thus alone,
   I can as well as thou forego the gain
   Which this occasion offers.—Let it pass!
   There is within us, be it superstition,
   Th'unscann'd opinions from our childhood cherish'd,
   Or natural instinct, still a strong aversion
   To ev'ry act of blood. Let us yield to it:
   We will not strain our nature from its bent:
   We'll do no violent deed.

Ray.

 catching hold of Zaterloo with great agitation .
   O thou hast moved me! thou hast conjured thought!
   Wast thou — wast thou indeed thus circumstnaced?
   And thy deserted love; what was her fate?

Zat.
   She felt not long the cruel separation:
   One lovely bush of the pale virgin thorn,
   Bent o'er a little heap of lowly turf,
   Is all the sad memorial of her worth;
   All that remains to mark where she is laid.

Ray.
   Oh! Oh! and was it thus!

Zat.
   But let us now shake off these dismal thoughts,
   This hour was meant for social fellowship:
   Resume your seats, my friends, and, gentle Rayner,
   Clear up thy cloudy brows and take thy place.

Ray.
   I fain would be excused.

Zat.

 gently forcing him to sit down .
                                            Nay, no excuse:
   Thou must perforce a social hour or two
   Spend with us. To ye all, my noble friends, Drinks.
   I fill this cup.
                                            — Bernard, how goes thy suit?
   Hast thou yet to thy greedy lawyer's pocket
   Convey'd thy hindmost ducat? Ha, ha, ha!
   Had he, with arms in hand, ta'en from thee boldly
   Half of the sum, thou wouldst have called him robber.
   Ha, ha, ha!


 Laughing heartily.
Ber.
                                            Yes, thou mayst laugh:
   We nice distinctions make.—I had an uncle,
   Who once upon a time—

Zat.
                                            I hope, good Bernard,
   Thy story will be shorter than thy suit.


 Rayner , who has been sitting in gloomy thoughtfulness, without attending to any thing around him, whilst Zaterloo has been keeping an eye of observation on him, now rises up in great agitation to go away.
Zat.
   What is the matter, Rayner?

Ray.
   I am disturb'd—I know not how I am—
   Let me take leave, I pray you.

Zat.
   Thou shalt not quit us thus. What is the matter?

Ray.
   Question me not: my thoughts are all confused:
   There is a strong temptation fasten'd on me.
   I am not well.

Zat.

 aside to Bernard .
                                            Ay, now it works upon him:
   This will do—

 Aloud, and preventing Rayner from going.
   If thou'rt unwell, art thou not with thy friends?

Ray.
   If ye indeed are friends, not spirits enleagued
   To force me to my ruin, let me go—
   Let me go to my home.



 
Zat.
   What, dost thou call a bare unfurnish'd chamber,
   With griping landlord clam'ring in thine ears
   For what he knows thou canst not give, thy home?

Ray.

 sighing deeply .
   I have no other.

Zat.
                                            Stay thou here with us:
   In the next chamber thou shalt rest awhile.
   Lead him, my kind Sebastian, by the hand:
   There is a sort of woman's kindliness
   About thy nature, which befits thee best
   To be a sick man's friend. I'll follow you.

 Exit Rayner , leaning on Sebastian ; turning about to his friends triumphantly as they go off.
   I have secured my man.

 A voice heard without.
   But hark! a voice without! It is my mother's.
   Secure the latticed door. Plague on her kindness
   To haunt me here! I have forgot my promise.

 To Bernard .
   Make fast the latticed door and answer for me.

Ber.

 after fastening a door of lattice work through which the countess is seen .
   Who's there? what want ye?

Countess

 without .
   I want my son: I pray you is he here?

Ber.
   He is not here.

Countess

 without .
   Nay, say not so, I think he is with you.
   O tell him I have sate these three long hours,
   Counting the weary beatings of the clock,
   Which slowly portion'd out the promised time
   That brought him not to bless me with his sight.
   If he is well, why does he thus forget?
   And if he is not, as I fear he is not,
   Tell me the worst, and let me be with him
   To smooth his couch and raise his sickly head.

Zat.

 aside to Bernard .
   Tell her it is unseemly for a mother
   To run about like a new foolish wife.

Ber.
   If you complain thus movingly, fair widow,
   We shall believe you seek a second husband
   In lieu of your good son; and by my truth
   It were a better errand.

Countess.
   O base of thought, as most unblest of speech!
   My son is not with you: it cannot be:
   I did him wrong to seek him in such company.

Ber.

 speaking loud after her as she retires from the door .
   Not far from hence, there is a nightly meeting
   Of worthy, sober, well-disposed folks,
   Who once a week do offer up their prayers
   And chant most saintly hymns till morning dawn,
   It is more likely you will find him there.


 Omnes laughing.
Zat.
   She's gone.

Ber.
                                            Yes, yes; come from thy hiding place.

Zat.
   Now what a most unreasonable woman!
   Thinks she, thus ripen'd to these manly years,
   That I must run whene'er my finger aches
   To lean my silly head upon her lap?
   'Tis well I have no wife.

Ber.
                                            Ay, so it is.
   There is no pleasing those high legal dames
   With endless claims upon a man's regard:
   Heaven save us from them all!

Zat.
   Well, this I drink to precious liberty:
   He is a fool indeed who parts with that.

 A loud voice and bustling heard without.
   What's this comes next to plague us?

Ber.
                                            'Tis Mira's voice.

Zat.
   Hast thou not sent to say, that urgent bus'ness
   Detains me from her banquet?

Ber.
   I have; I sent to her a written message.

Zat.
   Keep fast the door, and I will stand conceal'd.
 Conceals himself, and Mira appears through the latticed door.
Mira


 without. 
   Where is Count Zaterloo? Let me pass on.

Ber.
   Affairs of greatest consequence detain him.
   My beauteous Mira; and I needs must say
   That now you may not pass.—
   He's much concern'd: early upon the morrow
   He will be with you.

Mira.
   Upon the morrow! prate not thus to me!
   He shall to-night go with me where I list,
   Or never see my face again. To-morrow!
   Open the door, I say! this weakly barrier
   Shall not oppose my way.


 Beating violently against the door.
Zat.

 aside to Bernard .
   Faith, I believe we must e'en let her in:
   She may do some rash thing, if we persist.


 Bernard unbolts the door ; Zaterloo comes from his concealment; and enter Mira , superbly dressed, and in a violent passion.
Mira.
   Is this the way you keep your promises?
   Is this your faith? is this your gallantry?

Zat.
   Mira, my gentle love, I pray thee hear me!
   I sent to tell thee business of great moment.

Mira.
   Yes, yes! I have received your scurvy message,
   And well I know that ev'ry paltry matter
   Is cause sufficient for neglecting me.

Zat.
   Thou knowst to be from thee is painful to me.

Mira.
   So it should seem, by taking so much care
   To comfort you the while.

 Pointing to the wine, &c.
   You do your bus'ness jovially, methinks.

Zat.
   Thou art too warm: accuse me as thou wilt
   Of aught but want of love.

Mira.
   O, thou deceitful man! I know thee well:
   Thou talkst of love and thou wouldst break my heart.



 
Zat.
   Indeed I am to blame, my gentle love;
   Yet be not thus: in token of forgiveness
   This friendly cup receive, and smile upon me.


 Offering her a cup, which she dashes to the ground.
Mira.
   Off with thy hateful gifts! nought from thy hands
   Will I receive; I scorn thy offering.
   E'en the rich robe thou hast so often promised,
   Ay and so oft forgot, so I must call it,
   I would now scorn, since thou dost slight my love.

Zat.
   Indeed, my Mira, thou shalt have that robe
   Before two days be past: I swear to thee.
   Then do not look so frowningly, my love;
   I know thou hast a soft relenting nature;
   Smile my forgiveness.

Mira.
   O thou provoking man! thou knowst full well
   It is thyself and not thy gifts I prize:
   Thou knowst too well how my fond doating heart
   Is moved with the soft witch'ry of thy tongue;
   Yet thou wilt vex me thus, and break my heart.
   Oh! 'tis too much!


 Pretending to burst into tears.
Zat.
   I cannot see thee weep: what wouldst thou have?

Mira.
   I will have nought, unless you go with me.

Zat.
   I cannot now, for I have urgent bus'ness.

Mira.
   Then stay, and never see my face again.
   O that some friendly hand would end my days,
   Since I have lived to see me thus despised.

Zat.

 aside to Bernard .
   Bernard, I think I must e'en go with her.
   See thou to Rayner: I will soon return.

 Aloud. 
   Then let us go, my love, thou dost compel me.
   Thy hand, sweet Mira.


 Exeunt Zaterloo and Mira .
Ber.
   Well, gentle friends, it is blest liberty
   Our noble chief enjoys. I must to Rayner.
   Stay if you will, and keep you merry here.

Omnes.
   No, we are tir'd, we will retire to rest.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Rayner ' s lodgings. Enter Rayner alone.
Ray.
   Be still, ye idle thoughts that toss me thus,
   Changing like restless waves, but ever dark;
   Or one of you above his fellows rise,
   And bear a steady rule. Adversity!
   Thou'st come upon me like an ambush'd foe
   In armed strength. If I had mark'd thy course,
   I might have girt myself for thine approach,
   While distant still, and met thee like a man.
   But when new-fetter'd in a lover's bonds,
   And dazzled too with hope's deceitful brightness,
   Cam'st thou like a thick cloud of desert sand,
   And in dark night o'erwhelm'd me: deepest night,
   Through which no waking vision ever gleams,
   Save thy grim visage only, loathly want,
   In all thy varied forms of misery.
   My night, my day dreams, ah! how are ye changed,
   Since in the new-betroth'd, the lover's fancy,
   Ye wove your sheeny maze of mingled thoughts,
   Like sparkling dew-webs in the early sun!

 After a pause.
   Elizabeth! methinks e'en now I see her.
   As in the horrors of my last night's dream,
   When, after following her through flood and fire,
   She turn'd to me, and her weak arms stretch'd forth.
   But ah! how changed, how pale, and spent, and keen!
   As if already blighting poverty,
   That portion which her love must share with me,
   Had marr'd—cease, cease, base thought, it shall not be!
Enter Herman with a knapsack on his back, as if prepared for a journey.

   What, my good Herman, art thou so soon ready?

Her.
Yes, my dear master, but if you think it too soon, I will not go to-day. Nay if it were not that you force me to go, I should as soon have thought of deserting my friend pardon my boldness, sir in a wild wood amongst savages, as leaving you here in this strange place in the state you are in at present. Pardon my boldness, sir.
Ray.
Thou hast no boldness to pardon, Herman: thou art well entitled to call thyself my friend; there is not one amongst those who have borne that name, who would have done more for me than thou hast done.
Her.
Ah, sir!
Ray.

 assuming a look of cheerfulness .
Fy, do not look so sadly upon me, man; thanks to thy good nursing and the good broth thou hast made me, I am getting strong again: and as for the state of my coffers, for which thou so much concernest thyself, do not let that disturb thee. My tide of means is, to be sure, pretty well ebbed just now; but some wind or other will spring up to set it a flowing again. In the mean time thou knowest I would travel alone: perhaps I may ramble about a little while mysteriously, like the wandering Jew-or some of those lonely philosophers which thy old stories tell thee about, and there is no knowing what I may find out to do me good. The philosopher's stone, thou knowest, may as well fall into my hands as those of any other wanderer: so pray thee, man, don't look so ruefully upon me.
Her.
Ah, my dear master! there is something here that hangs heavy on my heart, and says, if I leave you now, some evil will befall you: I beseech you let me stay with you, I shall find something to do in this town, and I can—


 
Ray.
No, no, no! Speak of this no more—we have argued this point already. And what is this which thou puttest down so slily upon the table?
 Taking up a little packet which Herman has put secretly upon the table.
Ha! the jewels I have given thee in room of thy wages! out upon it! thou wilt make me angry with thee now, and it grieves me to be angry with thee. Put it up, put it up: I command thee to do it; and thou knowest I have not often used this stern word.
Her.
O no, sir! You have not indeed used it; and I shall never meet with another master like you.
Ray.
Thou wilt meet, I hope, my dear Herman, with a far better master than I have been to thee, though not with one for whom thou wilt do so much kindly service as thou hast done for me; and for this cause, perhaps, thou wilt not love him so much. God prosper thee for it, wherever thou goest!— Take this embrace and blessing for all thou hast done for me. Farewell! farewell! thou must be gone now, indeed thou must. God bless thee, my good Herman.

 Pushing Herman gently off the stage, who wipes his eyes and seems unwilling to go.

 Exit Herman .
Ray.

 alone .
   Now, am I left alone: there's no one near me
   That e'er hath loved or cared for me. Methinks
   I now can better look i' th' surly face
   Mine alter'd state, and bear to be in want.
   I am alone, and I am glad of it.
   Alas! changed heart of mine! what is that state
   Which gives to thee such thoughts?—Elizabeth—
   Again, again! This strong idea still!
   I am distracted when I think of this:
   Therefore I must not, if I would be honest.
   Those men—or are they men or are they devils?
   With whom I met last night; they've fasten'd on me
   Fell thoughts, which, though I spurn them, haunt me still.
   Would I had never met them!
   Here comes my landlord with his surly face
   Of debts and claims, and ev'ry irksome thing.
Enter Landlord with a letter.

   Good morrow, landlord.

Land.
I thank you, sir; I am glad to hear you call me landlord; for I began to be afraid you had mistaken me for your host.
Ray.
I understand you well enough, and indeed I have proved your patience, or rather your impatience, much longer than I wished. You have a letter in your hand.
Land.

 giving it .
There, sir; if it bring you the news of any good luck, I shall be glad of it.
Ray.

 agitated .
From Elizabeth, Good morning —good morning to you.
Land.
Read it, sir, and see if it bring you any good news; it is time now to look for some change in your favour.
Ray.
I cannot open it whilst thou art here. Have the goodness at least not to stand so near me.
Land.
So I must not occupy a place in my own house, forsooth, for fear of offending the good folks who do me the honour to live in it.

 Retires to the bottom of the stage, muttering to himself.
Ray.

 after opening the letter with great emotion and reading it .
   O What is this?—
   Abandon'd by the friend with whom she liv'd,
   And coming here to join me with all speed!
   O God! O God!


 Sinks down upon a chair in violent agitation.
Land.

 running up to him .
                                            What is the matter now?

Ray.
   Begone, begone! I cannot answer thee.


Enter Count Zaterloo .
Zat.
   Ha, Rayner! how is't with thee? thou lookst wildly.

 To landlord. 
   Speak to me, friend: he heeds not what I say:
   Has any new misfortune happen'd to him?

Land.
   I fear there has, sir.

Zat.
                                            Rouse thee up, brave Rayner,
   A friend is come to thee.

Ray.

 starting up .
                                            Ha, is it thou?
   Com'st thou upon me now, my tempter? now,
   E'en in my very moment of distraction?
   Thou knowst thy time: some fiend has whisper'd to thee.
   Ay, ay! say what thou wilt.

Zat.
   Thou'rt surely mad; I came not, on my word,
   To say aught to thee which an honest ear
   Might not receive; nor will I even speak,
   Since it so moves thee—

Ray.

 interrupting him eagerly .
                                            Ah, but thou must!
   Thou must speak that, which, in its darkest hour,
   Push'd to extremity, 'midst ringing dizziness
   The ear of desperation doth receive,
   And I must listen to it.

Zat.
   What, sayst thou so? 'Tis well
 aside 
, but be more prudent,
   We are o'erheard.

 Looking suspiciously to landlord, who has retired a few paces behind.
   Come with me to my lodgings;
   There wait my friends; all things shall be concerted:
   Come with me, instantly; the time is precious.

Ray.

 in a tone of despair, clasping his hands vehemently .
   Ay, ay! I'll go with thee.


 Exeunt Count Zaterloo and Rayner : Manet landlord.


 
Landlord

 coming forward .
What's this I've overheard? Is this devil now going to tempt the poor distressed young man to do some foul deed in his necessity?—I have tempted him too, with my hard-hearted murmuring about the few wretched pounds that he owes me. I'll run after him and say, I don't care whether he pay me or not.
 Running to the door and then stopping short. 
No, no! softly, softly! I dare say it is only some sharping business they have got on hand, such as needy gentlemen are sometimes forced to follow: I have got my conscience newly cleared off at confession last week, and I am to make an offering next holy-day to the shrine of our patron St. Bernard; this is no time, good sooth, to lose such a sum upon scruples.

 Exit.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A wood: dark night, with a pale gleam of distant lightning seen once or twice on the edge of the horizon. Advancing by the bottom of the stage, a few moving lights, as if from lanterns, are seen, and at the same time several signal calls and loud whistles are heard, with the distant answer returned to them from another part of the wood. Enter Count Zaterloo, Rayner, Sebastian , and others of the band, armed, and a few of them bearing in their hands dark lanterns. It is particularly requested, if this play should ever be acted, that no light may be permitted upon the stage but that which proceeds from the lanterns only.
Zat.

 to Seb ..
   They must be near: didst thou not hear their call?

Seb.
   Methought I did; but who in this wild wood
   May credit give to either eye or ear?
   How oft we've been deceiv'd with our own voices,
   From rocky precipice or hollow cave,
   'Midst the confused sound of rustling leaves,
   And creaking boughs, and cries of nightly birds,
   Returning seeming answer!

Zat.
   Rayner, where standest thou?

Ray.
                                            Here, on thy left.

Zat.
   Surely these wild scenes have depriv'd thy tongue
   Of speech. Let's hear thy voice's sound, good man,
   To say thou art alive. Thou'rt marvellous silent:
   Didst thou not also hear them?

Ray.
   I know not truly if I did. Around me,
   All seems like the dark mingled mimicry
   Of fev'rish sleep; in which the half-doubting mind,
   Wilder'd, and weary, with a deep-drawn breath,
   Says to itself, “Shall I not wake?”

Zat.
   Fy man!
   Wilt thou not keep thy soldier's spirit up?
   To-morrow's sun will be thy waking time,
   And thou wilt wake a rich man and a free.

Ray.
   My waking time!—no, no! I must sleep on,
   And have no waking.

Zat.
   Ha! does thy mind misgive thee on the brink?

Ray.
   What passes in my mind, to thee is nothing,
   If my hand do the work that's fasten'd on me.
   Let's pass to it as quickly as thou wilt,
   And do not speak to me.—


Enter Bernard and others, armed, &c.
Zat.
   Well met, my friends! well met! for we despair'd
   Of ever seeing you.

Seb.
   Yet we have heard your voices many times,
   Now calling us on this side, now on that,
   As though you had from place to place still skipp'd,
   Like Will o'the Wisp, to lose us on our way.

Ber.
   We've fared alike: so have we thought of you.

Zat.
   Have you discover'd aught of those we seek?

Ber.
   No; all is still, as far as we have traversed:
   No gleaming torch gives notice from afar,
   Nor trampling hoofs sound on the distant road.

Zat.
   Then must we take again our sev'ral routes,
   That haply we may learn, ere he approach,
   What strength we have to face, and how he travels:
   And that we may not wander thus again,
   This aged oak shall be our meeting place;
   Where having join'd, we'll by a shorter compass
   Attack them near the centre of the wood.

Seb.
   The night grows wondrous dark: deepswelling gusts
   And sultry stillness take the rule by turns;
   Whilst o'er our heads the black and heavy clouds
   Roll slowly on. This surely bodes a storm.

Zat.
   I hope the devil will raise no tempest now,
   To save this child of his, and from his journey
   Make him turn back, crossing our fortunes.

Ber.
   Fear not!
   For, be the tempest of the devil's raising,
   It will do thee no harm. To his good favour
   Thou hast wrong not thy merit claims too strong.

Zat.
   Then come on, friends, and I shall be your warrant!
   Growl sky and earth and air, ne'er trouble ye;
   They are secure who have a friend at court.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A different part of the wood, wild and savage: the scene still darkened, and a storm of thunder and lightning, accompanied with hail. Enter Rayner .
Ray.
   I know not where these men have shelter'd them.
   I've miss'd their signal: this loud stunning din


 
   Devours all other sounds. Where shall I go?
   Athwart this arch of deep embodied darkness,
   Swift shiv'ring lightnings glare, from end to end
   Mantling the welkin o'er in vivid flames;
   Or from aloft, like sheeted cataracts
   Of liquid fire, seem pour'd. E'en o'er my head
   The soft and misty-textured clouds seem changed
   To piles of harden'd rocks, which from their base,
   Like the up-breaking of a ruin'd world,
   Are hurl'd with force tremendous. Patt'ring hail
   Beats on my shrinking form with spiteful force:
   Where shall I shelter me? Ha! through the trees
   Peers, near at hand, a small but settled light:
   I will make quickly towards it; perhaps
   There may be some lone dwelling in the wood.


 Exit.
SCENE III.
The inside of a cave: an old man discovered sitting by a small table made of coarse planks, with a lamp burning dimly upon it: the thunder heard still very loud.
Old man.
   Doth angry heav'n still roll its loudest peal
   O'er th' unblest head? Ay, through its deaf'ning roar
   I hear the blood-avenging Spirit's voice,
   And, as each furious turmoil spends its strength,
   Still sounds upon the far-receding storm
   Their distant growl.
   'Tis hell that sends its fire and devils up
   To lord it in the air. The very wind,
   Rising in fitful eddies, horribly sounds,
   Like bursts of damned howlings from beneath.
   Is this a storm of nature's elements?
   O, no, no, no! the blood-avenging spirits
   Ride on the madding clouds: there is no place,
   Not in the wildest den, wherein may rest
   The unblest head.

 Knocking heard without.
                                            —Ha! knocking at my door!

 Pauses and listens, much alarmed: knocking heard still louder.
   Say, who art thou that knockst so furiously?
   Thinkst thou the clouds are sparing of their din,
   That thou must thunder too? Say who thou art,
   And what thou wouldst at such an hour as this,
   In such a place?

Ray.

 without .
   I am a lone and tempest-beaten traveller,
   Who humbly begs a shelter from the night.

Old man.
   Then art thou come where guest yet never enter'd.

Ray.

 without .
   I do not ask admittance as a guest.
   Wouldst thou not save a creature from destruction,
   E'en a dumb animal? unbar the door,
   And let me lay my body under shelter.


 Old man makes no answer; the storm heard very loud.
Ray.

 without .
   If thou'rt a man in nature as in voice,
   Thou canst not sit at peace beneath thy roof,
   And shut a stranger out to the rude night.
   I would, so circumstanced, have shelter'd thee.

Old man.
   He tries to move me with a soothing voice.

 Aloud. 
   Thou art a knave; I will not let thee in.


Aside.
Ray.

 without .
   Belike I am, yet do not fear my wiles:
   All men are honest in a night like this.

Old man.
   Then I will let thee in: whoe'er thou art:
   Thou hast some sense, shouldst thou lack better things.


 He unbars a small door, and Rayner enters, much ruffled and exhausted by the storm, and without his hat.
Ray.
   I'm much beholden to thee.

Old man.
                                            No, thou art not.

Ray.
   The violence of the night must plead my pardon,
   For breaking thus unask'd upon your rest.
   But wand'ring from my way, I know not how,
   And losing my companions of the road,
   Deep in the 'tangled wood the storm o'ertook me;
   When spying through the trees this glimm'ring lamp,
   And judging it, as now it doth appear,
   The midnight taper of some holy man,
   Such as do oft in dreary wilds like this
   Hold their abode, I ventured onwards.

Old man

 offering him bread and dried fruits .
   Perhaps thou'rt hungry.

Ray.
   I thank you gratefully.

Old man.
   There is no need.
   Fall to, if thou hast any mind to it.

Ray.
   I thank you truly, but I am not hungry.

Old man.
   Perhaps thou'rt dainty: I've nought else to give thee.

Ray.
   I should despise myself, if any food
   Could bear such value in my estimation,
   As that it should to me a straw's worth seem,
   To feed on homeliest, or on richest fare.

Old man.
   So much the better.


 They sit down.
Ray.
   If I may guess from all I see around me,
   The luxuries and follies of the world
   Have long been banish'd here.


 Old man looks sternly at Rayner , who looks fixedly upon him again, and both remain for some time silent.
Old man.
                                            Why lookst thou so?
   What is there in my face that thou wouldst scan?
   I'm old and live alone: what wouldst thou know?

Ray.
   I crave your pardon, and repress all wishes
   That may disturb you.

Old man.
   The night wears on, let us both go to rest.

Ray.
   I thank you, for in truth I'm very tired.

Old man

 pointing to his couch .
   There is thy place.



 
Ray.
   Nay, I am young; the ground shall be my couch.
   I will not take your bed.


 Old man then gives Rayner a cloak, which he wraps about him, laying himself down in a corner of the cave. The storm now heard at a distance. After walking up and down for some time, the old man goes close up to Rayner , who appears asleep, and looks earnestly upon him ; Rayner , openign his eyes, seems surprised.
Old man.
   Be not afraid, I will not cut thy throat.

Ray.

 starting half up from the ground .
   Nay, heaven such deed forefend! I fear thee not.
   I can defend myself.


 Grasping his sword.
Old man.
   Be not offended; but methought thy looks
   Did seem as though thou wert afraid of me.
   Rest thou in peace—rest thou in peace, young man:
   I would not do thee harm for many worlds.


Rayner goes to rest again, still keeping his drawn sword in his hand. The old man goes to rest likewise, but shortly after starts from his couch in great agitation.
Old man.
   It is mine hour of horror: 'tis upon me!
   I hear th' approaching sound of feet unearthly:
   I feel the pent-up vapour's chilly breath
   Burst from the yawning vault:—It is at hand.

 Turning towards the door as if he saw some one enter.
   Ha! com'st thou still in white and sheeted weeds,
   With hand thus pointing to thy bloody side?
   Thy grave is deep enough in hallow'd ground!
   Why com'st thou ever on my midnight rest?
   What dost thou want? If thou hast power, as seeming,
   Stretch forth thine arm and take my life; then free
   From fleshy fears, in nature as thyself,
   I'll follow thee to hell, and there abide
   The searing flames: but here, upon this earth,
   Is placed between the living and the dead
   An awful mystery of separation,
   Which makes their meeting frightful and unhallow'd.

 In the vehemence of his agitation he throws out his arm, and strikes it against Rayner , who, alarmed at his ravings, has left his resting-place, and stolen softly behind him.
   Ha! what art thou?


 Starting, and turning round to Rayner .
Ray.
   Nay, thou with bristling locks, loose knocking joints
   And fixed eyeballs starting in their sockets,
   Who speakst thus wildly to the vacant space,
   Say rather, what art thou?

Old man.
                                            I am a murderer.

 Rayner starts back from him, and drops his sword.
   Ah! wherefore dost thou stare so strangely on me?
   There's no blood on me now! 'tis long since past.
   Hast thou thyself no crime, that thus from me
   Thou dost in horror shrink?

Ray.
   Most miserable man!

Old man.
   Thou truly sayst, for I am miserable.

Ray.
   And what am I?

 After a disturbed pause.
   The storm did rage and bellow through the air,
   And the red lightning shiver'd:
   No traveller would venture on his way
   In such a night.—O, blessed, blessed storm!
   For yet it hath not been, and shall be never.
   Most Great and Merciful! saved from this gulf,
   May I to thee look up?—No: in the dust—

 As he bows himself to the earth, and is about to kneel, the report of fire-arms is heard without, and he starts up again.
   'Tis done!—O, it is done!—the horrible act!


 Exit, beating his forehead violently.
Old man.
   What may this be? Some band of nightly robbers
   Is near my cave, committing violent deeds.
   Thy light, weak flame, shall not again betray me,
   And lure unwelcome visitors.


 Puts out the lamp; and, after a dark pause, enter Count Zaterloo , supporting himself an first gentleman, who bears a dark lantern, which he sets down on the ground, and fastens the door of the cave carefully behind them.
Zat.
   I am wounded grievously: who would have thought
   Of such a powerful guard of armed men
   Attending on his journey. He is slain:
   Didst thou not see him fall?

 st gent.
   Yes; we have kill'd our bird, but lost the eggs.
   Fortune has play'd us false, yet we've escaped:
   Here we may rest; this cave is tenanted
   With some lone being whom we may control,
   And take possession—

 Discovering old man.
   Something living here!
   What art thou?

Old man.
   I am a thing no better than yourselves.

 st gent.
   The better then for thee that thou art so.

Zat.
   Conduct me onward: I perceive an opening
   Which leads, I guess, to some more close recess:
   Lay me down there, for I am very faint.

 st gent.
   I will obey thee,—Come thou too, old man;
   Not from my sight one moment must thou budge.
   Come on; for, mark me well, shouldst thou betray us,
   Though fetter'd down with chains in grated dungeons,
   Our arms were long enough to reach to thee.


 Exeunt.


 
SCENE IV.
Another part of the wood. At a distance, on the background, are discovered two men watching a dead body by the light of a torch stuck between the boughs of a tree: the stage otherwisc perfectly dark. Enter Gobus on the front of the stage.
Gobus.
I fear they will all escape from us amongst these 'tangled paths and vile perplexing thickets. A man cannot get on half a dozen paces here but some cursed clawing thing catches hold of him, and when he turns round to collar his enemy, with a good hearty curse in his mouth, it is nothing but a thorn-bush or a briar after all. A plague upon't! I'll run no more after them if they should never be taken. — Who's there?

Enter a Companion.
Com
What, are you here, Gobus? I thought you had been in search of the robbers.
Gobus
So I was; but what does it signify? they have all got the start of us now, and we can scarcely expect they will have the civility to wait till we come up with them.
Com.
Ay, ay, Gobus, that is a lazy man's argument. Why, there was one of them seen by Bertram not five minutes since, with his head uncovered, stalking strangely amongst the trees like a madman, and he vows he will follow the scent through every path of the wood but he will have him, either alive or dead.
Gobus.
But if he be a young stout robber, he may knock Bertram on the head in the mean time, and relieve him from the obligation of keeping his vow.
Com.
Never fear that: his bugle-horn is by his side, and as soon as he comes up with him he will give his companions notice, and they will run to his assistance.
Gobus.
Well, well, let them manage it the best way they can, and let us join our friends yonder, who keep watch by the body; there is good store of dried sticks in that corner, we may make a fire, and warm ourselves till they return.

 Horn heard without.
Com.
Ha! there is the signal, and close at hand too. He has caught his man and wants assistance; let us run to him, or the villain will escape.

 Exeunt companion and Gobus , who follows rather unwillingly, whilst the men who were watching the body run eagerly to the front of the stage.
 st man.
It sounded to the right hand of us; let us strike into this path.

 Horn sounds again.
 d man.
Ay, there it sounds again; it is to this hand of us, but it is so dark, there is no finding our way.
 st man.
We have been so long by the torch-light that the darkness is darker to us: run back and fetch the light with thee.

 Several other attendants from different parts of the wood run across the stage, calling to one another with great eagerness, whilst the  d man, running back again to the bottom of the stage, snatches the torch from the tree, and comes forward with it.

Enter Bertram, Gobus , and others, with Rayner as their prisoner.
Gobus

 speaking as they enter .
Here is light! here is light, friends! bring him near it, I pray you, that we may see what kind of a fish we have caught in our net. Ay, just as I said now, as hanged a looking villain as ever scowled through the grates of a dungeon. See what a wild murderous look he has with his eyes! this is the very man that did the deed, I warrant ye. Let us pull the cords faster round his arms though: if he get one of his mischievous hands loose again, there is no knowing which of our brains he may knock out first.
 st man.
It will never be thine, I am sure, thou'rt always safe when the knocking out of brains is going on.
Gobus.
As I'm a sinner he'll get one of his hands loose if we do not take care of him.

 Attempting to tighten the cords round Rayner ' s arms. 
Ber.

 putting him away with indignation .
For shame, man, he is bound tight enough; I will not suffer thee to lay a finger upon him; and as for the hanged face thou talkst of, alack a-day! it goes to my heart to see him, such a goodly-looking gentleman, for such I'll be sworn he is.
Gobus.
Ay, no doubt! it is ever thus with thee. Thou didst never in thy life see a thief go to the gallows without crying out, “alack a-day! what a fine looking fellow it is!” Ay, and if he could but make shift to howl out half a verse of a psalm along with his father confessor, thou wert sure to notch him down upon thy holiday tables as one of the new made saints. Ay, there be no such great saints now-a-days as those who pass, with the help of a Dominican, through the hangman's hands to the other world; he beats your pope and your cardinals all to nothing in smuggling a sinner cleverly in by the back door to heaven.
Ber.
So much the better for thee; it is the only chance thou hast of ever getting there.—Stand off, I say
 pushing Gobus away 
, and do not stare thus upon the prisoner! art thou not ashamed to stare in an unhappy man's face after this fashion? we don't know what hard fate may have brought him into these circumstances.
 To the attendants.  Move on: we are losing time here.

Gobus.
What, will you not pinion him more closely?
Ber.
No, beast! I would rather flay the skin off

 
that fool's back of thine than gall a hair's breadth of his body.
 In a softened voice to Rayner .
Speak, sir, if the rope hurts your arms; we will not use you cruelly.
Ray.
What didst thou say to me? was there kindness in thy voice?
Ber.
Yes, sir, there was kindness in it. Do the ropes hurt your arms? if they do we will loosen them a little.
Ray.
I wist not that my arms were bound: but if thou hast any kindness in thee, give me a drink of water when thou canst get it, for my mouth is very parched.
Ber.
Yes, sir, that you shall not want, though I should pay gold for it.—Move on, comrades: the night is far advanced, and we must guard the prisoner and the dead body of our master back to the city before the morning break.

 Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A spacious court with a magnificent building in front; a great concourse of people are discovered as if waiting in expectation of some sight.
 st crowd.
The court is marvellously long of breaking up; I'm tired of waiting; and yet I don't like to lose the sight, after having stayed so long for it.
 d crowd.
I fear it will go hard with the young man.
 d crowd.
I fear it will, poor gentleman!
Woman crowd.
Ah! poor young man! it is an awful end.
 d crowd.
Ay, I remember well the last criminal that was condemned here; a strong-built man he was, though somewhat up in years. O, how pale he looked as they led him out from court! I think I stood upon this very spot as he passed by me; and the fixed strong look of his features too—it was a piteous sight!
 d crowd.
Ah, man! but that was nothing to the execution. I paid half a dollar for a place near the scaffold; and it would have made any body's heart drop blood to have seen him when he lifted up the handkerchief from his eyes, and took his last look of the day-light, and all the living creatures about him.
 d crowd.
Ay, man, that a human creature should be thus thrust out of the world by human creatures like himself; it is a piteous thing?

Enter a man from the court.
Omnes eagerly.
What news? what news of the prisoner?
Man.
He has just finished his defence, in which he has acquitted himself so nobly, setting off his words too with such a manly grace, that it is thought by every body he will be set free.
 d crowd.
Indeed! I should not have expected this now; spoke so nobly, sayst thou?
 st crowd.
Yes, yes, noble blood makes noble speaking.
Woman crowd.
Well, and is it not best so? poor young man! I'm sure I'm glad of it.
 st crowd.
And aint I so too, milk-faced doll! though I hate to be kept so long staring for nothing. I wonder what brought me here in a murrain to it!
 d woman.
La! then we sha'n't see him pass by with the chains upon his legs.
 st crowd.
No, no! nor nothing at all. Come, let me pass, I have been too long here.
 Pressing through the crowd to get out. 

Woman crowd.
O, you tread upon my toes!
 st crowd.
Devil take you and your toes both! can't you keep them out of people's way then?
Woman crowd.
Plague take it! what had we all to do to come here like so many fools!

Enter a second man from the court.
 d crowd.
Here comes another man from the court.
 Calling to the man. 
Ho, friend! is he acquitted yet?
 d man.
No, nor like to be; the judge is just about to pronounce sentence upon him, but something came so cold over my heart, I could not stay to hear it.

 Several of the mob climb eagerly up upon the walls of the building, and look in at the uindows.
Crowd below.
What do you see there, sirs?
Crowd above.
The judge is just risen from his seat, and the black signal is lifted up.
Omnes.
Hush! hush! and let us listen!

 A deep parst.
Crowd

 above .
Sentence is passed now.
Crowd

 below .
God have mercy on him!
 d crowd.
I would not wear my head upon his shoulders for all the prince's coffers.
 st crowd.
Alas! poor man! he is but a youth.
 d crowd.
Yet he must be cut off in the flower of his days.
 st crowd.
It is an awful thing!
Woman crowd.
Ah! but a youth, and a goodly-looking youth too, I warrant ye.
 d woman.
Alack a-day! many a one falls into crimes, but all do not pay the forfeit.
 d crowd.
Ha! who comes this way so fair and so gentle in her mien; thus toss'd and 'tanglel amidst the pressing crowd, like a stalk of will flower in a bed of nettles? Come, clear the way there, and let the lady pass.


 

Enter Elizabeth , attended by Richard , the crowd making way for her.
Eliz.
I'm much obliged to you.
Richard.
We thank you, good sirs! My mistress and I are both strangers in this town, and the nearest way to your best inn, as we are told, is through this court; but the crowd is so great I think we had better turn back again.
Eliz.
What is the meaning of this eager multitude, So gather'd round the entry to this palace?
 d crowd.
It is no palace, madam, but a public court: there is a gentleman of noble birth who is just now condemned to death for murder, and we are waiting to see him led forth from his trial; you had better stop a little while and see the sight too.
Eliz.
O, no! I'm come here in an evil hour!— A gentleman of noble birth—Alas! but that the crime is murder, 'twere most piteous.
Omnes

 eagerly .
There he comes! see, see! there he comes!

Enter Rayner , fettered and guarded, from the court, followed by Bertram and others, and advances slowly towards the front of the stage, the crowd opening and making a lane for him on every side.
 st crowd.
   What a noble gait he has even in his shackles!

 d crowd.
   Oh! oh! that such a man should come to this!

Eliz.

 after gazing eagerly at the distant prisoner .
   Merciful heaven! the form has strong resemblance.

Rich.
   Sweet mistress, be not terrified with forms;
   'Tis but a distant form.

Eliz.
   Ha! then it strikes thee too!—Merciful God!

Rich.
   Patience, dear madam! now as he advances,
   We shall be certified of the deception.
   Rayner is not so tall as this young man,
   Nor of a make so slender; no, nor yet—

Eliz.
   Peace, peace! for he advances.


 Watching the prisoner as he advances with a countenance of distracted eagerness, till he comes near her; then, uttering a loud shriek, falls down, and is supported by Richard and several of the crowd.
Offi.

 conducting Rayner .
   What fainting maid is this obstructs the way?
   Let not the crowd so closely press around her.
   Open the way, and let the pris'ner pass.

Ray.

 upon the crowd opening and discovering Elizabeth .
   O, sight of misery! my Elizabeth!
   The last and fellest stroke of angry heav'n
   Falls on this cursed head.

Offi.
   What may this mean? let us pass on: we stop not,
   Whate'er betide.

Ray.
   Nay, but you do: for here there is a power
   Stronger than law or judgment. Give me way:
   It is permitted me by ev'ry sense
   Of human sympathy, were I e'en bound
   With chains tenfold enlock'd.

 Bending over Elizabeth .
   Thou loveliest and thou dearest! O thou part
   Of my most inmost self! art thou thus stricken?
   Falls this stroke on thee?

 Kneeling down and endeavouring to support her, but finding himself prevented by his chain.
   Is there not strength in the soul's agony
   To burst e'en bands of iron?

 Trying furiously to burst his fetters, but cannot; then, with a subdued voice ,
   Am I indeed a base condemned wretch,
   Cut off from ev'ry claim and tie of nature?

 Turning to the officer.
   Thou who dost wear the law's authority,
   May it not be permitted for the love
   Of piteous charity?—Shall strangers' hands
   Whilst I am thus—O, do not let it be!

Offi.
   No, no! move on: it cannot be permitted.

Ray.

 fiercely roused .
   What, sayst thou so?

 Turning to the crowd.
                                            Ye who surround me, too,
   Each with the form and countenance of a man,
   Say ye 'tis not permitted?
   To you I do stretch forth these fetter'd hands,
   And call you men: O, let me not miscall you!

Voices from the crowd.
   Fie on't! unbind his hands, unbind his hands,
   And we will stand his sureties.

Ber.

 stepping forward in a supplicating posture to the officer .
   Do but unbind his hands a little space,
   And shoot me through the head if he escape.
   My arm secured him; be my recompense
   This one request.

Offi.

 to Bertram .
   Go to; thou art a brave man, but a weak one.

 To the guard. 
   Move on: we halt no longer.

Crowd.
   By all good saints we stand by the brave Bertram,
   And he shall be unshackled.


 Menacingly.
Offi.
   Soldiers, present your muskets to these madmen,
   And let them speak; the pris'ner halts no longer;
   Move on.


 A tumult between the crowd and the guard, and Rayner is forced off the stage by the soldiers.
 st crowd.
Shame light on such hard-hearted cruelty!
 d crowd.
If there had been but six of us with arms in our hands he durst not have put this affront upon us.
 d crowd.
But who looks to the lady? She is amongst strangers it seems, and has only this poor old man to take care of her.


 
Omnes.
We will take care of her then; we will take care of her: ay, and she shall be waited upon like an empress.
 d crowd.
Ay, so she shall, let the cost be what it will. I am only a poor cobbler, God knows, yet I will pawn the last awl in my stall but she shall be waited upon like an empress. See! see! she begins to revive again.
Eliz.

 opening her eyes with a heavy sigh .
   Is it all vanish'd? 'twas a dreadful vision!

 Looking on the crowd around her.
   O, no! the crowd is here still—it is real;
   And he is led away—horrible! horrible!


 Faints again, and is carried off the stage by Richard and the crowd.
SCENE II.
A square court, surrounded on all sides by the gloomy walls of a prison, the windows of which are narrow and grated, and the heads of one or two of the prisoners seen looking ruefully through the grates. Enter Hardibrand , and looks round him for some time without speaking.
Har.
   Gloomy enough, gloomy enough, in faith!
   Ah! what a wondrous mass of dreary walls,
   Whose frowning sides are riv'n in narrow slips,
   As I have seen full oft some sea-worn cliff,
   Pierced with the murky holes of savage birds.
   Ah! here the birds within are clipt o' wing,
   And cannot fly away.
Enter Ohio with a tankard in his hand, crossing the stage.

   Holla, my friend! I pray thee not so fast;
   Inform me, if thou canst, where I may find
   The keeper of the prison.

Ohio.
   Know you what prince you speak to? saucy knave!
   I'll have thee scorch'd and flay'd, and piece-meal torn,
   If thou dost call me friend.

Har.
   Good words at least; I meant thee no offence.
   I see thou hast a tankard in thy hand,
   And will not question thy high dignity.
   Softly; here's money for thee.


 Giving him money.
Ohio.
                                            Silver pieces!
   He! he! he! he! hast thou got more of them!

Har.
   Nay, thou art greedy; answer first my question;
   Tell me at which of all these gloomy doors
   I needs must knock to find out the chief gaoler.
   Thou lookst like some fetch-carry to the prisoners;
   Dost understand me?

Ohio.
   Ay, there's the place, go knock at yonder door.

Har.

 after knocking .
   This door is close nail'd up, and cannot open.

Ohio

 grinning maliciously, and pointing to another door .
   No, thou art wrong; it is the door hard by,
   With those black portals.

 Hardibrand knocks at the other door.
   Knock a little louder.

Har.

 after knocking some time .
   A plague upon't! there is no one within.

Ohio

 still grinning maliciously .
   No, thou art wrong again: it is not there:
   It is that door upon the other side.


 Pointing to the opposite wall.
Har.
   What, dost thou jest with me, malicious varlet?
   I'll beat thee if thou tell me false again.

Ohio.
   Negroes be very stupid, master friend.


Enter the Keeper of the prison.
Keeper

 to Ohio .
   Thou canker-worm! thou black-envenom'd toad!
   Art thou a-playing thy malicious tricks?
   Get from my sight, thou pitchy viper, go!


 Exit Ohio .
Har.
   What black thing is it? it appears, methinks,
   Not worth thine anger.

Keeper.
   That man, may't please you, sir, was born a prince.

Har.
   I do not catch thy jest.

Keeper.
   I do not jest; I speak in sober earnest;
   He is an Afric prince of royal line.

Har.
   What sayst thou? that poor wretch who sneaketh yonder
   Upon those two black shanks?


 Pointing off the stage.
Keeper.
                                            Yes, even he:
   When but a youth, stol'n from his noble parents,
   He for a slave was sold, and many hardships
   By sea and land hath pass'd.

Har.
   And now to be the base thing that he is!
   Well, well, proceed.

Keeper.
   At last a surly master brought him here,
   Who, thinking him unfit for further service,
   As then a fest'ring wound wore hard upon him,
   With but a scanty sum to bury him,
   Left him with me. He ne'ertheless recover'd;
   And though full proud and sullen at the first,
   Tamed by the love of wine which strongly tempts him,
   He by degrees forgot his princely pride,
   And has been long establish'd in these walls
   To carry liquor for the prisoners.
   But such a cursed, spite-envenom'd toad!—

Har.
   Out on't! thou'st told a tale that wrings my heart.
   Of royal line; born to command, and dignified
   By sufferings and dangers past, which make
   The meanest man ennobled: yet behold him;

 Pointing off the stage.


 
   How by the wall he sidelong straddles on
   With his base tankard!—O, the sneaking varlet!
   It makes me weep to hear his piteous tale,
   Yet my blood boils to run and cudgel him.
   But let us on our way.

Keeper.
   You are a noble stranger, as I guess,
   And wish to be conducted through the prison.
   It is an ancient building of great strength,
   And many strangers visit it.

Har.
   It is indeed a place of ancient note.
   Have you at present many criminals
   Within these walls?

Keeper.
   Our number is, thank God! respectable,
   Though not what it has been in better days.

Har.
   In better days!—Well, do thou lead the way.


 As they are about to go off the stage, they are stopped by a voice singing from one of the highest windows.
SONG.
   Sweetly dawns the early day,
   Rise, my love, and come away:
   Leave thy grim and grated tower,
   Bounding walls, and step-dame's lower;
   Don thy weeds and come with me,
   Light and happy are the free.

   No fair mansion hails me lord,
   Dainties smoke not on my board;
   Yet full careless by my side
   Shalt thou range the forest wide;
   Though finer far the rich may be,
   Light and happy are the free.
Har.
   Alas, poor soul! I would that thou wert free!
   What weary thrall is this that sings so sweetly?

Keeper.
   A restless, daring outlaw;
   A fellow who hath awed the country round,
   And levied contributions like a king,
   To feast his jolly mates in wood and wild;
   Yea, been the very arbiter of fortune,
   And as his freakish humours bit, hath lifted
   At one broad sweep the churl's saved store to leave it
   In the poor lab'rer's cot, whose hard-worn palm
   Had never chuck'd a ducat 'gainst its fellow.

Har.
   'Tis a brave heart! has he been long confined?
   But list! he sings again.

SONG.    Light on the hanging bough we'll swing,
   Or range the thicket cool,
   Or sit upon the bank and sing
   Or bathe us in the pool.
Har.
   Poor pent up wretch! thy sou roves far from home.

SONG.    Well, good-man time, or blunt or keen,
   Move thee slow or take thy leisure,
   Longest day will bring its e'en,
   Weary lives but run a measure.
Har.
   'Tis even so, brave heart, or blunt or keen,
   Thy measure has its stint.
Enter Bertram from one of the doors of the prison.

   I think thou hast the air of an old soldier:

 To Bertram as he is burrying past him.
   Such, without greeting, never pass me by.
   Ha, Bertram! is it thou?

Ber.
   What, mine old general?

Har.
   Yes, and mine old soldier.
   How dost thou, man? how has it fared with thee
   Since thou hast left the service?

Ber.
   I thank your honour; much as others find it;
   I have no cause to grumble at my lot.

Har.
   'Tis well, but what's the matter with thee now?
   Thine eyes are red with weeping, and thy face
   Looks ruefully.

Ber.
   I've been to visit, here, a noble youth,
   Who is condemn'd to die.

Har.
   A noble youth!

Ber.
   Yea, a soldier too.

Har.
   A soldier!

Ber.
   Ay, your honour, and the son
   Of a most gallant soldier.

Har.
   But he is innocent?

Ber.
   He is condemn'd.

Har.
   Shame on it! were he twenty times condemn'd,
   He's innocent as are these silver'd locks.

 Laying his hand vehemently on his head.
   What is his name?

Ber.
                                            Rayner.

Har.
   Ha! son to my old comrade, Rayner!
   Out on the fools! I would as soon believe
   That this right hand of mine had pilfer'd gold
   As Rayner's son had done a deed of shame.
   Come, lead me back with thee, for I must see him.

Ber.
   Heav'n bless your honour! O, if by your means
   He might have grace!

Har.
                                            Come, let us go to him.

Ber.
   Not now, an' please you: he is now engaged
   With one most dear to him. But an hour hence
   I will conduct you to his cell.

Har.
                                            So be it!
   Mean time, stay thou with me, and tell me more
   Of this unhappy youth: I have a mind,
   With the good keeper's leave, to view the prison.


 Exeunt.


 

Enter Mira and Alice by opposite sides, both muffled up in cloaks and their faces concealed.
Mira

 stopping Alice .
   Nay, glide not past me thus with muffled face:
   'Tis I, a visitor to these grim walls,
   On the same errand with thyself. How goes it
   With our enthralled colleague? doth he promise
   Silence to keep in that which touches us
   Of this transaction, for the which he's bound?

Alice.
   He is but half persuaded; go thyself
   And use thy arts—hush, here's a stranger near us.

 Enter a man who gives a letter mysteriously to Mira , and upon her making a sign to him, retires to the bottom of the stage whilst she reads it.
   What readst thou there, I pray thee, that thy brows
   Knit thus ungraciously at ev'ry line?

Mira.
   Knowst thou that I must doff my silken robes,
   Despoil my hair of its fair ornaments,
   And clothe me in a gown of palmer's grey,
   With clouted shoon and pilgrim's staff in hand
   To bear me o'er rude glens and dreary wastes
   To share a stony couch and empty board,
   All for the proving of my right true love
   For one in great distress. Ha! ha! ha! ha!
   So doth this letter modestly request:
   I pray thee read it.

Alice

 reading the letter .
   “A deadly wound rankles in my side, and I have no skilful hand to dress it, and no kind friend to comfort me. I am laid upon the cold earth, and feel many wants I never knew before. If thou hast any love for me, and as thou hast often wished to prove that love, come to me quickly: but conceal thyself in the coarse weeds of a pilgrim; my life is a forfeit to the law if any one should discover where I am. A friend in disguise will give into thy hands this letter, and conduct thee to thy miserable Zaterloo.”


 Returning the letter. 
   And what sayst thou to this?

Mira.
   I have, in truth, upon my hands already
   Troubles enough; this is, thou knowst, no time
   To take upon me ruin'd men's distresses.

Alice.
   But 'tis thyself hast brought this ruin on him:
   'Twas thy extravagance.

Mira.
                                            Thou art a fool!
   His life's a forfeit to the law: 'tis time,
   Good time, in faith! I should have done with him.
   Why dost thou bend these frowning looks on me?
   How many in my place would for the recompense
   Betray him to the officers of justice!
   But I, thou knowst right well, detest all baseness,
   Therefore I will not.

Alice.
   Hush, hush! thou speakst too loud:
   Some one approaches.


Enter Countess Zaterloo .
Countess

 to Mira .
   I pray you, madam, pardon this intrusion;
   Tracing your steps, I have made bold to follow you.
   I am the mother of an only son,
   Whom for these many days I have not seen:
   I know right well nought is conceal'd from you
   Of what concerns him; let me know, I pray you,
   Where I may find my child.

Mira.
   Madam, you speak to one who in his secrets
   Has small concern.

Countess.
   Nay, now, I pray you, do not keep it from me:
   I come not with a parent's stern rebuke:
   O tell me where he is, for love of grace:
   But, if you will not, say if he is sick,
   Or if he is distress'd with any want.
   Tell, for love's sake! I have no child but him.

Mira

 giving her the letter .
   There, madam; this is all I know of him.
   'Twas yonder stranger gave it to my hand;

 Pointing to the man.
   We need not interrupt you with our presence;
   And so good day.


 Exeunt Mira and Alice .
Countess

 after reading the letter .
   Alas, my son! and art thou low and wounded?
   Stretch'd on the cold ground of thy hiding place
   In want and fear? Oh art thou come to this?
   Thou who didst smile in thy fair op'ning morn,
   As cherubs smile who point the way to heaven.
   And wouldst thou have a stranger come to thee?
   Alas! alas! where can thy aching head
   So softly rest as on a parent's lap?
   Yes, I will wrap me in the pilgrim's weeds,
   Nor storm nor rugged wild shall bar my way.
   And though declining years impair my strength,
   These arms shall yet support thy feeble frame,
   When fairer friends desert thee.

 To the messenger, beckoning him to come forward. 
   Good friend, this is no place to question thee!
   Come with me to my home.


 Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
The inside of the prison. Rayner and Elizabeth are discovered sitting sorrowfully by one another in earnest discourse.
Ray.
   Thou sayest well, my sweet Elizabeth;
   In this I have against thy love offended.
   But in the brightness of fair days, in all
   The careless gaiety of unruffled youth,
   Smiling like others of thy sex, I loved thee;


 
   Nor knew that thou wert also form'd to strive
   With the braced firmness of unyielding virtue
   In the dark storms of life—alike to flourish
   In sunshine or in shade.—Alas! alas!
   It was the thoughts of seeing thee—but cease!
   The die is cast; I'll speak of it no more:
   The gleam which shows to me thy wondrous excellence
   Glares also on the dark and lowering path
   That must our way divide.

Eliz.
   O no! as are our hearts, one is our way,
   And cannot be divided. Strong affection
   Contends with all things, and o'ercometh all things.
   I will unto thee cling with strength so terrible,
   That human hands the hold will ne'er unlock.

Ray.
   Alas, my love! these are thy words of woe,
   And have no meaning but to speak thy woe:
   Dark fate hangs o'er us, and we needs must part.
   The strong affection that o'ercometh all things,
   Shall fight for us indeed, and shall o'ercome:
   But in a better world the vantage lies
   Which it shall gain for us; here, from this earth
   We must take different roads and climb to it,
   As in some pitiless storm two 'nighted travellers
   Lose on a wild'ring heath their 'tangled way,
   And meet again.

Eliz.
   Ay, but thy way, thy way, my gentle Rayner—
   It is a terrible one.
   Oh flesh and blood shrinks from the horrid pass!
   Death comes to thee, not as he visiteth
   The sick man's bed, pillow'd with weeping friends:
   O no! nor yet as on the battle's field
   He meets the blood-warm'd soldier in his mail,
   Greeting him proudly.—Thou must bend thy neck,
   This neck round which mine arms now circled close
   Do feel the loving warmth of youthful life:
   Thou must beneath the stroke—O horrid! horrid!

Ray.

 supporting her from sinking to the ground .
   My dear Elizabeth, my most beloved!
   Thou art affrighted with a horrid picture
   By thine own fancy traced; look not upon it:
   All is not dreadful in the actual proof
   Which on th' approach frowns darkly. Rouse thy spirit;
   And be not unto me at this dark push
   My heaviest let; thou who shouldst be my stay.

 She groans heavily.
   What means that heavy groan? I'll speak its meaning,
   And say, that thou to nature's weakness hast
   The tribute paid, and now wilt rouse thyself
   To meet with noble firmness what perforce
   Must be; and to a lorn and luckless man,
   Who holds in this wide world but thee alone,
   Prove a firm, gen'rous, and heart-buoyant mate,
   In the dark hour. Do I not speak it rightly?

Eliz.
   Thou dost, thou dost! if nature's weakness in me
   Would yield to the heart's will.


 Falling on his neck in a burst of sorrow.

Enter Father Mardonio .
Mar.
   My children, ye have been in woful conference
   Too long: chide not my zeal that hither brings me
   To break upon it. On you both be shed
   Heav'n's pitying mercy!

Ray.
   Amen, good father! thou dost call us children
   With a most piteous and kindly voice:
   Here is a daughter who in this bad world
   Will yet remain to want a father's care;
   Thus let me form a tie which shall be sacred;

 Putting Elizabeth ' s hand into Mardonio ' s.
   She has no parent.

Enter Keeper of the prison.
   What brings thee here? We would be left in peace.

Keeper

 to Rayner .
   I am by a right noble stranger urged,
   Who says he has in many a rough campaign
   Served with your valiant father in the wars,
   To let him have admittance to your presence.
   Bertram conducts him hither.

Ray.
   Served with mine honour'd father! and thus circumstanced,
   Now comes to see his son! Well, be it so:
   This is no time for pride to wince and rear,
   And turn its back upon the patt'ring hail,
   Bearing the thunder's shock. Let it e'en be:
   Admit him instantly.

 Calling him back.
   Nay, ere thou goest,
   What is he call'd?

Keeper.
   The Gen'ral Hardibrand.

Ray.
   An honour'd name.
 Exit Keeper.

 To Elizabeth .

   Retire, my love:
   I cannot bear to have thy woes exposed
   Before a stranger's gaze.


 She retires with Mardonio to an obscure part of the prison at the bottom of the stage.

Enter Hardibrand and Bertram .
Har.

 to Bertram : stopping short as he enters, and gazing upon Rayner , who is turned away from them, and looking after Elizabeth .
   It is the son of Rayner: in his form
   And face, though thus half turn'd from us, I see
   His father. Still a soldier and a gentleman
   In ev'ry plight he seem'd. A clown or child
   Had sworn him such clad in a woollen rug.

 Advancing to Rayner .
   Young soldier, I did know your gallant father;
   Regard me not as an intruding stranger.



 
Ray.
   I thank you, courteous sir: in other days
   Such greeting to my heart had been most welcome.
   A gallant father and condemned son
   May in the letter'd registers of kindred
   Alliance have; but in the mind's pure record,
   They no relation bear: let your brave friend
   Still be to you as one who had no son.

Har.
   No, boy; that sentiment bespeaks thy blood.
   Heed not those fetter'd hands: look in my face,
   Look in my face with the full confidence
   Of a brave man; for such I'll swear thou art.
   Thinkst thou that I am come to visit thee
   In whining pity as a guilty man?
   No, by the rood! if I had thought thee such,
   Being the son of him whose form thou wearst,
   I should have cursed thee. Thou by mis'ry press'd,
   Hast strongly tempted been, I know thy story:
   Bertram has told it me: and spite of courts,
   And black-robed judges, laws, and learn'd decisions,
   I do believe it as I do my creed.
   Shame on them! Is all favour and respect
   For brave and noble blood forgotten quite?

Ray.
   Ah, do not fear! they will remember that,
   And nail some sable trappings to my coffin.

Har.
   I would that to their grave and pompous chairs
   Their asses' ears were nail'd! Think they that men,
   Brave men, for thou thyself—What corps, I pray thee,
   Didst thou belong to in thy prince's service?

Ray.
   The first division of his fourth brigade
   Was that in which I served.

Har.
   Thou hast companion been to no mean men.
   Those six brave officers of that division,
   Upon the famed redoubt, in his last siege,
   Who did in front o' th' en'my's fiercest fire
   Their daring lodgement make, must needs of course
   Be known to thee.

Ray.
   I knew them well; five of them were my friends.

Har.
   And not the sixth?

Ray.
   He was, alas! my greatest enemy;
   To him I owe these bonds.

Har.
   A curse light on his head, brave though he be!

Ray.
   O curse him not, for woes enough already
   Rest on his wretched head.


 Bowing low, and putting his hand on his head.
Har.
   Ha! thou thyself,—thou wast thyself the sixth!
   Thank heav'n for this! Then let them if they will
   Upon a thousand scaffolds take thy life,
   And spike thy head a thousand feet aloft;
   Still will I say thy father had a son.

 Rushing into his arms.
   Come to my soldier's heart, thou noble bird
   Of a brave nest!—must thou indeed be pluck'd
   And cast to kites? By heav'n thou shalt not die!
   Shall such a man, as thou art, from his post
   Be shamed and push'd for one rash desp'rate act?
   It shall not be, my child! it shall not be!

Ray.

 smiling .
   In faith, good gen'ral, could your zeal prevent it,
   I am not yet so tired of this bad world,
   But I could well submit me to the change.

Har.
   I'll with all speed unto the governor,
   Nor be discouraged, though he loudly prate
   That grace and pardon will but leave at liberty
   The perpetrators of such lawless deeds
   To do the like again, with such poor cant.


 Elizabeth , who has been behind backs, listening eagerly to their conversation, and stealing nearer to them by degrees in her eagerness to hear it, now rushes forward, and throws herself at Hardibrand ' s feet.
Eliz.
   We ask not liberty; we ask but life.
   O grant us this, and keep us where they will,
   Or as they will. We shall do no disquiet.
   O let them grant us life, and we will bless them!

Ray.
   And wouldst thou have me live, Elizabeth,
   Forlorn and sad, in loathly dungeon pent,
   Kept from the very use of mine own limbs,
   A poor, lost, caged thing?

Eliz.
   Would not I live with thee? would not I cheer thee?
   Wouldst thou be lonely then? wouldst thou be sad?
   I'd clear away the dark unwholesome air,
   And make a little parlour of thy cell:
   With cheerful labour eke our little means,
   And go abroad at times to fetch thee in
   The news and passing stories of the day.
   I'd read thee books: I'd sit and sing to thee:
   And every thing would to our willing minds
   Some observation bring to cheer our hours.
   Yea, e'en the varied voices of the wind
   O' winter nights would be a play to us.
   Nay, turn not from me thus, my gentle Rayner!
   How many suffer the extremes of pain,
   Ay, lop their limbs away, in lowest plight
   Few years to spend upon a weary couch
   With scarce a friend their sickly draughts to mingle!
   And dost thou grudge to spend thy life with me?

Ray.
   I could live with thee in a pitchy mine;
   In the cleft crevice of a savage den,
   Where coils the snake, and bats and owlets roost,
   And cheerful light of day no entrance finds.
   But wouldst thou have me live degraded also;
   Humbled and low? No, liberty or nought
   Must be our boon.

Har.
   And thou shalt have it too, my noble youth:
   Thou hast upon thy side a better advocate
   Than these grey hairs of mine.

 To Elizabeth .
   Bless that fair face! it was not made for nothing.
   We'll have our boon; such as befits us too.


 
   No, hang them if we stoop to halving it!

 Taking her eagerly by the hand.
   Come with me quickly; let us lose no time:
   Angel from heaven thou art, and with heav'n's power
   Thou'lt plead and wilt prevail.

Ray.
   In truth thou wilt expose thyself, my love,
   And draw some new misfortune on thy head.


 Endeavouring to draw her away from Hardibrand .
Eliz.

 to Hardibrand .
   What new misfortune? can they kill thee twice?
   We're tardy: O move quickly! lose no time!

Har.
   Yes, come, and Bertram here will guide our way:
   His heart is in the cause.

Ber.
   Yes, heart and soul, my gen'ral. Would my zeal
   Could now make some amends for what those hands
   Against him have unwittingly committed.
   O that the fellest pains had shrunk their nerves
   Ere I had seized upon him!

Ray.
                                            Cease, good Bertram!
   Cease to upbraid thyself. Thou didst thy duty
   Like a brave man, and thou art in my mind:
   Not he who seized, but he whose gen'rous pity
   Did, in my fallen state, first show me kindness.

 Bertram kisses his hand.
   Go go! they wait for thee.

Ber.
   They shall not wait. Would that we were return'd,
   Bearing good tidings!

Har.
   O fear it not, my heart says that we shall.


 Exeunt Elizabeth, Hardibrand , and Bertram . Manent Rayner and Mardonio .
Mar.
   Hope oft, my son, unbraces the girt mind,
   And to the conflict turns it loosely forth,
   Weak and divided. I'm disturb'd for thee.

Ray.
   I thank thee, father, but the crime of blood
   Your governor hath ne'er yet pardon'd; therefore
   Be not disturb'd for me; my hopes are small.

Mar.
   So much the better. Now to pious thoughts
   We will direct—Who comes to interrupt us?


Enter the Turnkey.
Ray.
   It is the turnkey; a poor man who, though
   His state in life favours not the kind growth
   Of soft affections, has shown kindness to me.
   He wears upon his face the awkwardness
   And hesitating look of one who comes
   To ask some favour; send him not away.

 To turnkey. 
   What dost thou want, good friend? out with it, man!
   We are not very stern.

Turnkey.
   Please you, it has to me long been a priv'lege
   To show the curious peasantry and boors,
   Who from the country flock o' holy days,
   Through his strait prison bars, the famous robber,
   That overhead is cell'd; and now a company
   Waits here without to see him, but he's sullen
   And will not show himself. If it might please you
   But for a moment opposite your grate
   To stand, without great wrong to any one,
   You might pass for him, and do me great kindness.
   Or the good father there, if he be willing
   To doff his cowl and turn him to the light,
   He hath a good thick beard, and a stern eye,
   That would be better still.

Ray.

 laughing .
   Ha! ha! ha! what say ye to it, father?


 Laughing again more violently than at first.
Mar.

 turning out the turnkey in a passion, and returning sternly to Rayner .
   What means this wild and most unnatural mirth;
   This lightness of the soul, strange and unsuited
   To thy unhappy state? it shocks me much.
   Approaching death brings nought to scare the good,
   Yet has it wherewithal to awe the boldest:
   And there are seasons when the lightest soul
   Is call'd on to look inward on itself
   In awful seriousness.

Ray.
   Thou dost me wrong; indeed thou dost me wrong.
   I laugh'd, but, faith! I am not light of soul:
   And he who most misfortune's scourge hath felt
   Will tell thee laughter is the child of mis'ry.
   Ere sin brought wretchedness into the world,
   The soberness of undisturbed bliss
   Held even empire o'er the minds of men,
   Like steady sunshine of a cloudless sky.
   But when it came, then came the roaring storm,
   Lowering and dark; wild, changeful, and perturb'd;
   Whilst through the rent clouds ofttimes shot the gleam
   More bright and powerful for the gloom around it.
   E'en 'midst the savage strife of warring passions,
   Distorted and fantastic, laughter came,
   Hasty and keen, like wild-fire in the night;
   And wretches learnt to catch the fitful thought
   That swells with antic and uneasy mirth
   The hollow care-lined cheek. I pray thee pardon!
   I am not light of soul.
   Death is to me an awful thing; nay, father,
   I fear to die. And were it in my power,
   By suffering of the keenest racking pains,
   To keep upon me still these weeds of nature,
   I could such things endure, that thou wouldst marvel,
   And cross thyself to see such coward-bravery.
   For oh! it goes against the mind of man
   To be turn'd out from its warm wonted home,
   Ere yet one rent admits the winter's chill.

Mar.
   Come to my breast, my son! thou hast subdued me.

 Embracing him.
   And now we will lift up our thoughts to Him
   Who hath in mercy saved thy hands from blood.



 
Ray.
   Yes, in great mercy, for the which I'd bow
   In truer thankfulness, my good Mardonio,
   E'en with these fears of nature on my mind,
   Than for the blessing of my spared life,
   Were it now proffer'd me.


 They retire into the obscurity of the dungeon, at the bottom of the stage, and the scene closes on them.
SCENE II.
A small apartment in a solitary cottage in the country. Enter Count Zaterloo , supported by an attendant, and followed by the Countess in the disguise of a pilgrim; both of them wearing masks. She places a pillow for his head on a couch or sickchair, and he is placed upon it, apparently with pain.
Countess

 to attendant .
   There, set him gently down; this will support him.

 To Count Zaterloo .
   How art thou now? I fear thou'rt very faint
   After so long a journey.

 To attendant. 
   We have no farther need of thine assistance:
   Thou wilt retire, but be upon the watch.


 Exit attendant.
Zat.

 unmasking .
   Now, charming Mira, lay disguise aside;
   Speak thine own natural voice, and be thyself:
   There is no eye to look upon us now;
   No more excuse for this mysteriousness.
   Let me now look upon thy face and bless it!
   Thou hast done well by me: thou'rt wondrous gentle.
   I knew thee fair and charming, but I knew not
   Thou wast of such a soft and kindly nature.

 The countess unmasks and looks at him sorrowfully.
   Ha, mother! is it you?

Countess.
   Who should it be? where shouldst thou look for kindness?
   When we are sick, where can we turn for suecour;
   When we are wretched, where can we complain;
   And when the world looks cold and surly on us,
   Where can we go to meet a warmer eye
   With such sure confidence as to a mother?
   The world may scowl, acquaintance may forsake,
   Friends may neglect, and lovers know a change,
   But when a mother doth forsake her child,
   Men lift their hands and cry, “a prodigy!”

Zat.

 taking hold of both her hands and kissing them. 
   O mother! I have been a thankless child!
   I've given thee hoary hairs before thy time;
   And added weight to thy declining years,
   Who should have been their stay.

Countess.
   Be calm, my son, for I do not upbraid thee.

Zat.
   Wretch that I am! I was an only son,
   And therefore bound by no divided tie
   To be to thee thy hold and thy support.
   I was a widow's son, and therefore bound
   By every generous and manly tie
   To be in filial duty most devoted.
   O I have vilely done! I feel it now;
   But if I live to be a man again,
   I'll prove a better son to thee, dear mother.

Countess.
   I know thou wilt, my dearest Zaterloo;
   And do not thus upbraid thyself too sharply;
   I've been a foolish mother to thy youth,
   But thou wilt pardon me.

Zat.
   Of this no more—How came you by my letter?
   If you did intercept it on its way,
   Mira is faithful still.

Countess.
   It was from Mira's hand that I received it.
   She toss'd it at me with a jeering smile
   When I with anxious tears inquired for thee.

Zat.

 rising half from his seat in great passion .
   O faithless, faithless woman! she it was,
   Who made of me the cursed thing I am!
   I've been a fool indeed and well requited.
   Base, avaricious, and ungrateful—oh!


 Putting his hand on his side, as if seized with sudden pain.
Countess.
   Such agitation suits not with thy state:
   What ails thee now?

Zat.
   The pain, the pain! it has return'd again
   With increased violence.

Countess.
   God send thee ease! why dost thou look so wildly,
   And grasp my hand so hard? What is't disturts thee?

Zat.
   My time on earth is short.

Countess.
   Nay, say not so: thou mayst recorer still.
   O why this seeming agony of mind?
   'Tis not the pain that racks thee.

Zat.
   There's blood upon my head: I am accursed.

Countess.
   Good heaven forefend! thou wand'rest? in thy speech.
   Thy life I know is forfeit to the law
   By some unlawful act, but oh no blood!

Zat.
   O for a short respite! but 'twill not be:
   I feel my time is near.

Countess.
   Thou wand'rest much: there's something on thy mind,
   Dark'ning thy fancy.

Zat.
   'Twas I that did it—I that murder'd him:
   He who must suffer for it did it not.

Countess.
   What words are these? my blood rans cold to hear them.



 
Zat.

 alarmed .
   Be still, be still! there's some one at the door:
   All round me is exposed and insecure.


 Countess Zaterloo goes to the door and receives something from a servant, shutting the door immediately.
Countess.
   It is a servant come to fetch me something.

Zat.
   Has he not heard it? he has heard it all!


 In violent alarm and agitation.
Countess.
   Be still, be still! it is impossible.
   Thou'st waked the pain again; I see thee tremble.

Zat.

 writhing as if in great pain .
   Ay, this will master me: 'twill have me now:
   What can be done? O for a short reprieve!

Countess.
   Alas, my child! what wouldst thou have me do?

Zat.
   I would have time turn'd backward in its course,
   And what is past ne'er to have been: myself
   A thing that no existence ever had.
   Canst thou do this for me?

Countess.
                                            Alas! I cannot.

Zat.
   Then cursed be thy early mother's cares!
   Would thou hadst lifted up my infant form
   And dash'd it on the stones! I had not lived—
   I had not lived to curse thee for thy pains.

Countess.
   And dost thou curse me then?

Zat.

 softened .
   O no! I do not!
   I did not curse thee, mother: was it so?

Countess.
   No, no, thou didst not: yet I have deserved—
   I was a mother selfish in my fondness;
   And with indulgence, senseless and extreme,
   Blasted the goodly promise of thy youth.

Zat.

 rising half up alarmed from his couch .
   Hark! there's a noise again! hast thou more servants
   Coming with errands to thee?—We're discover'd!

Countess.
   Be not so soon alarm'd: it is impossible.

Zat.
   Is there an inner chamber? lead me there;

 Pointing to a door.
   I cannot rest in this.

 Stopping short eagerly as she is leading him out with great difficulty.
   —Thine absence haply
   From thine own house, suspicion may create:
   Return to it again, and through the day
   Live there as thou art wont; by fall of eve
   Thou'lt come to me again.—I'm very weak;
   I must lean hard upon thee.


 Exit, looking suspiciously behind him as if he heard a noise, and supported with great difficulty by his mother.
SCENE III.
The Countess Zaterloo ' s house. Enter Countess and a female attendant.
Att.
   Ah! wherefore, madam, are you thus disturb'd
   Pacing from room to room with restless change,
   And turning still a keen and anxious ear
   To every noise? What can I do for you?

Countess.
   Cease, cease! thou canst do nothing, my good girl:
   I have a cause, but do not seek to know it.


Enter a Servant.
Serv.
   There is a stranger—

Countess

 starting with alarm .
   Ha! what dost thou say?
   A stranger! what appearance does he wear?
   Is there but one? Looks he suspiciously?

Serv.
   Be not alarmed, madam; 'tis a woman.

Countess

 feigning composure .
   Thou art a fool to think I am alarm'd:
   Or man or woman, whosoe'er it be,
   I am unwell, and must not be disturb'd.

Serv.
   It is a lady of distinguish'd mien,
   Though much in grief, and she so earnestly
   Pleads for admittance that I am compell'd—
   Pardon me, madam; but to look upon her
   Would move your heart to pity.

Countess.
   Let her enter.

 Exit servant.
   Who may this be? why do I tremble thus?
   In grief!—the wretched surely will not come
   In guileful seeming to betray the wretched.

 To attendant. 
   Knowst thou who this may be?

Att.
   Indeed I do not.

Countess.
   Retire then to a distance: here she comes:
   But do not leave the chamber.


 Attendant retires to the bottom of the stage, and enter Elizabeth with her hair and dress disordered, like one distracted with grief.
Eliz.
   Madam, I come a stranger to your presence,
   By misery embolden'd, and urged on
   By desperation. In your pity only
   Lives all the hope of my most wretched state:
   O kill it not! push me not to the brink
   Of misery so deep and terrible!
   Have pity! O have pity on my woe!
   Thou art a woman, and a woman's heart
   Will not be shut against a wretched woman.

Countess.
   What wouldst thou ask? thou dost with too much grief
   Conceal the point and object of thy suit.

Eliz.
   There is in prison bound, condemn'd to die,
   And for a crime by other hands committed,
   A noble youth, and my betrothed love:
   Your son—O shrink not back, nor look so sternly!
   Your son, as secret rumour hath inform'd me,
   Mortally wounded and with little hope
   Of life, can ample testimony give,
   Being himself of those who did the deed,
   That Rayner did it not:—O let him then,
   In whate'er secret place he lies conceal'd,
   In pity let him true confession make;
   And we will bless him—Heav'n will pardon him!

Countess.
   Despair hath made thee mad! art thou aware


 
   What thou dost ask of me? Go to our governors;
   They may have pity on thee; but from me
   It were an act against the sense of nature.

Eliz.
   Nay, say not so! I have for mercy sued
   At the proud feet of power, and been rejected:
   What injury can reach a dying man?
   Can his few hours of breathing poise the scales
   'Gainst the whole term of a man's reckon'd life
   In youth's best strength?

Countess.
   Go, thou hast been deceived with a false tale:
   And, were it true, hope ends not but with life;
   Heav'n only knows who is a dying man.

Eliz.
   For blessed charity close not your pity
   Against all other feelings but your own!

 Clasping the countess's knees and kissing her hand.
   Sweet lady! gentle lady! dearest lady!
   O be not ruthless to a soul bow'd down
   In extreme wretchedness!

Countess.
   Cease, cease! unlock thy hold: embrace me not!
   Has he for whom thou pleadst from out o' thyself
   Received his being? press'd with infant lips
   Thy yearning bosom? smiled upon thy knees,
   And bless'd thine ear with his first voice of words?
   Away, away! despair has made thee mad,
   That thus thou hangst upon me.

Eliz.
   O he for whom I plead is to my soul
   Its soul: is to my fancy its bound world,
   In which it lives and moves; all else beyond
   Darkness, annihilation. O have pity!
   For well thou sayst, despair has made me mad.

Countess.
   Let go, let go! thou with a tigress strivest,
   Defending her bay'd whelp: I have no pity.
   Heav'n will have pity on thee! let me go;
   Unlock thy desp'rate hold!


 Breaks from her and runs out, and Elizabeth , quite overcome, sinks upon the ground, the attendant rushing forward from the bottom of the stage to support her.

Enter Father Mardonio .
Mar.

 raising her .
   My daughter, heaven will send in its good time
   The aid that is appointed for thy state.
   Contend no more, but to its righteous will
   Submit thyself. Let me conduct thee hence.


 Exeunt , Mardonio and attendant supporting her. Re-enter the countess, looking fearfully round her as she enters.
Countess.
   She is gone now: thank God that she is gone!
   There is a horrid conflict in my mind.
   What shall I do? I strongly am beset.
   I will go quickly to some holy man,
   And ghostly counsel ask.


 Exit, crossing the stage with a quick, irresolute step, sometimes stopping to consider, and then hurrying on again.
ACT V. SCENE I.
A spacious outer room in the prison. Enter an Under-Gaoler and a Clown.
Clown.
I pray thee now, my good friend, here is a piece of money for thee—very good money too; thou mayst look o' both sides of it an' thou wilt: it has been wrapped up in the foot of my old holiday stockings since last Michaelmas twelvemonth, and neither sun nor wind has blown upon it. Take it, man, thou art heartily welcome to it if thou canst put me into a good place near the scaffold; or a place where I may see him upon the scaffold; for I am five-and-thirty years old next Shrove Tuesday when the time comes round, and I have never yet seen in all my born days so much as a thief set i' the stocks.
Gaoler.
Poor man! thou hast lived in most deplorable ignorance indeed. But stand aside a little, here is the famous executioner of Olmutz acoming, who has been sent for expressly to do the job; for our own is but a titulary hangman; he has all the honours of the office, but little experience in the duties of it.
Clown.
O dickens, I'll creep into a corner then, and have a good look of him. A man that has cut off men's heads, save us all! he must have a strange bloody look about him for certain.

Enter two Executioners, speaking as they enter.
 st ex.
What! no execution in this town for these ten years past? Lord pity you all for a set of poor devils indeed! Why, I have known a smaller town than this keep ye up a first executioner for the capital business, with a second man under him for your petty cart-tail and pillory work; ay, and keep them handsomely employed too. No execution in such a town as this for these ten years past! One might as well live amongst the savages.
 d ex.
It is a pitiful thing to be sure, but don't despise us altogether, Mr. Master: we shall improve by-and-bye; and here is a fair beginning for it too, if heaven prosper us.
 st ex.
Ay, thou wilt, perhaps, have the honour of hanging a thief or two before thou art the age of Methuselah; but I warrant ye, the beheading of this young nobleman here by the famous executioner of Olmutz will be remembered amongst you for generations to come. It will be the grand date from which every thing will be reckoned; ay, your very grandchildren will boast that their fathers were present at the sight.
 d ex.
I make no doubt on't, my master, but you are a very capital man in your way: heaven forbid that I should envy the greatness of any one; but I would have you to know that there have been

 
others in the world as good as yourself ere now. My own father cut off Baron Koslam's head upon this very scaffold that we now hear them hammering at.
 st ex.
Some wandering hocus-pocus baron, I suppose, that sold nostrums for the toothache. I always put such fellows into the hands of my underling to operate upon; I never count the dealing with them as your prime work, though for certain we must call it your head work; ha! ha! ha!
 Holding out his axe in a vain-glorious manner. 
Seest thou this axe of mine? The best blood of the country has been upon its edge. To have had one's father or brother under its stroke, let me tell thee, is equal to a patent of nobility.
 d ex.
Well, be it so. I envy no man, though thou art set over my head upon this occasion. I have whipped, branded, and pilloried in great meekness and humility for these seven years past; but the humble shall be exalted at last, and I shall have better work to do by-and-bye. Let us have no more contention about it.—Who's there?
 Observing gaoler and clown. 
Ay, gaoler, do thou go and kick up the black prince, he is snoring in some corner near us, and send him for some brandy.

 Gaoler coming forward, with the clown creeping after him, half afraid.
Gaoler.
The black prince is nowhere to be found; he has not been seen since the cells were locked.
 d ex.
Go fetch us some liquor thyself then.
 st ex.
But who is this sneaking behind thee, and afraid to show his face?
Gaoler.
Only a poor countryman, a friend of mine, who wanted to look at you as you passed.
 st ex.
Yes, yes, everybody has a curiosity to look at extraordinary persons.
 To clown. 
Come forward, man, and don't be afraid. Didst thou ever before see any thing better than a poor parish priest, or a scrubby lord of the village? didst thou, eh?
Clown

 abashed .
I don't know, please you: my brother did once stand within a team's length of the Prince of Carrara, when he passed through our village on his way to Franconia.
 st ex.
So then thou art not the first of thy family that has seen a great man. But don't be afraid, my good fellow, I a'n't proud nor haughty as many of them be: thou shalt even shake hands with me an' thou wilt.

 Holding out his hand to clown, who shrinks from him, and puts his hands behind his back.
Clown.
No, I thank you; I ben't much of a hand-shaker: I have got a little sore on my thumb, may it please you: I thank you all the same as though I did.
 st ex.
Ay, thou art too mannerly to call it the thing that we wot of. Well, thou art a good sort of fellow; don't be abashed: thou seest I am very condescending to thee. Come, then, thou shalt drink a cup of liquor with me. Follow us into the next ward, my good friend.
Clown

 shrinking from him again .
O na, save your presence! I'll go with the gaoler here.
 st ex.

 to  d executioner .
Ay, he is but a poor bashful clown, and don't know how to behave himself in good company.
 Exeunt executioners.

Clown.
Shake hands with him, Mary preserve us! it sets the very ends of my fingers a-dingling. Drink out of the same mug with him, too!
 sputtering with his lips 
poh! poh! poh! the taste of raw heads and carrion is on my lips at the thoughts of it.
 To gaoler. 
Come, let us go out of this place; I be long enough here.
 Stepping short as he goes off. 
What noise and hammering is this we hear?
Gaoler.
It is the workmen putting up the scaffold.
Clown

 starting .
What, are we so near to it? mercy on us! let me get out of this place, for it puts me into a terrible quandary.
Gaoler.
If this be the mettle thou art made of, thou hadst better take thy money again, and I'll give thy place for the sight to somebody that has got a stouter heart than thou hast.
Clown.
Na, na, I won't do that neither; I have a huge desire to see how a man looks when he is going to have his head cut off, and I'll stay for the sight, though I should swoon for it. Poor man! poor man! what frightful things there be in this world, when one's mind sets a-thinking upon it!—Is he a tall man, now
 to gaoler 
, or a short man? a palefaced man, or—ay, pale enough, I warrant. Mercy on us! I shall think of him many a night after this, before I go to sleep. Poor man! poor man! what terrible things there be in this world, if a body does but think of them.

 Exeunt clown and gaoler.
SCENE II.
A dungeon ; Rayner discovered sitting at a table by the light of a lamp, with a book in his hand; the clock from a neighbouring steeple strikes three, and he, roused by the sound, lays down the book.
Ray.
   This bell speaks with a deep and sullen voice:
   The time comes on apace with silent speed.
   Is it indeed so late?

 Looking at his watch.
                                            It is even so.

 Pausing, and looking still at the watch.
   How soon time flies away! yet, as I watch it,
   Methinks, by the slow progress of this hand,
   I should have lived an age since yesterday,
   And have an age to live. Still on it creeps,
   Each little moment at another's heels,
   Till hours, days, years, and ages are made up
   Of such small parts as these, and men look back,
   Worn and bewilder'd, wond'ring how it is.


 
   Thou trav'llest like a ship in the wide ocean,
   Which hath no bounding shore to mark its progress,
   O Time! ere long I shall have done with thee.
   When next thou leadest on thy nightly shades,
   Though many a weary heart thy steps may count,
   Thy midnight 'larum shall not waken me.
   Then shall I be a thing, at thought of which
   The roused soul swells boundless and sublime,
   Or wheels in wildness of unfathom'd fears:
   A thought; a consciousness; unbodied spirit.
   Who but would shrink from this? It goes hard with thee,
   Social connected man; it goes hard with thee
   To be turn'd out into a state unknown,
   From all thy kind, an individual being.
   But wherefore shrink? came we not thus to earth?
   And He who sent, prepared reception for us.
   Ay, glorious are the things that are prepared,
   As we believe!—yet, heaven pardon me!
   I fain would skulk beneath my wonted cov'ring,
   Mean as it is.
   Ah, Time! when next thou fillst thy nightly term,
   Where shall I be? Fy! fy upon thee still!
   E'en where weak infancy, and tim'rous age,
   And maiden fearfulness have gone before thee;
   And where, as well as he of firmest soul,
   The meanly-minded and the coward are.
   Then trust thy nature, at th'approaching push,
   The mind doth shape itself to its own wants,
   And can bear all things.

 Rising from his seat, and walking several times backward and forward.
   I know not how it is, I'm wondrous heavy;
   Fain would I rest awhile. This weary frame
   Has but a little more to do for me,
   And yet it asks for rest. I'll lay me down:
   It may be possible that I shall sleep,
   After these weary tossings of the mind;
   I feel as though I should.


 Goes to sleep, covering himself with a cloak.

Enter Ohio , creeping out from a hiding-place at the bottom of the stage, and going softly up to Rayner , looks for some time upon him with a malicious grin.
Ohio.
   Thou hast loved negroes' blood, I warrant thee.
   Dost sleep? ay, they will waken thee ere long,
   And cut thy head off. They'll put thee to rest;
   They'll close thine eyes for thee without thy leave;
   They'll bloat thy white skin for thee, lily-face.
   Come, less harm will I do thee than thy fellows:
   My sides are cold: a dead man needs no cloak.


 Beginning gently to pull off Rayner ' s cloak, who starts from his sleep, and looks at him in amazement.
Ray.
   Ha! what hole of the earth hath cast thee up?
   What thing art thou? and what wouldst thou with me?

Ohio.
   My sides are cold; a dead man needs no cloak.

Ray.
   'Tis true indeed, but do not strip the living.
   Where dost thou run to now? where wast thou hid?

Ohio

 after running to his hiding-place, and fetching out a stick, which he presents to Rayner .
   Beat me thyself, but do not tell of me.

Ray.
   I would not harm thee for a greater fault.
   I'm sorry thou art cold; here is my cloak:
   Thou hast said well; a dead man needs it not.
   I know thee now; thou art the wretched negro
   Who serves the prisoners; I have observ'd thee:
   I'm sorry for thee; thou art bare enough,
   And winter is at hand.

Ohio.
   Ha! art thou sorry that the negro's cold?
   Where wast thou born who art so pitiful?
   I will not take thy cloak, but I will love thee.
   They shall not cut thy head off.

Ray.
                                            Go thy ways;
   Go skulk within thy hiding-place again,
   And, when the cell is open'd, save thyself.

Ohio.
   They sha'n't cut off thy head.

Ray.
   Now, pray thee go.

Ohio.
   I'll kiss thy feet; I'll spend my blood for thee.

Ray.
   I do beseech thee go! there's some one coming:
   I hear them at the door.


 Pushes him hastily off.

Enter Hardibrand , advancing slowly to Rayner , his eyes cast upon the ground.
Ray.
   Good morrow, general: where's thy friendly hand?
   Why dost thou turn thine eyes aside, and fear
   To look me in the face? Is there upon it
   Aught that betrays the workings of the mind
   Too strongly mark'd? I will confess to thee
   I've struggled hard, I've felt the fears of nature;
   But yet I have the spirit of a man
   That will uphold me: therefore, my brave friend,
   Do me the grace to look upon me boldly;
   I'll not disgrace thee.

Har.
                                            No, my valiant boy!
   I know thou'lt not disgrace me, nor will I
   Put shame on thee by wearing on this morn
   A weeping face: I will be valiant too.
   We will not, Rayner, though thou'rt thus—Oh! oh!


 Bursting into tears.
Ray.
   My gen'rous friend, my second father, why
   Wilt thou oppress me thus?

Har.
   Bear with me, bear with me; I meant to brave it,
   And I will brave it. But to thee, my son,
   In thy distress, encompass'd as thou art,
   My heart so strongly has enlink'd itself,
   That to part from thee, boy, is—


 Falling on his neck, and bursting again into tears.


 

Enter Mardonio .
Mar.

 after looking at them for some time, and in a solemn imposing tone of voice .
   The strength of man sinks in the hour of trial;
   But there doth live a pow'r that to the battle
   Girdeth the weak: heaven's vivifying grace,
   And strength, and holy confidence be thine,
   Who art in mercy stricken!


 Holding up his right hand to heaven, whilst

Rayner , approaching with reverence, bows himself beneath it very low.
Ray.
   Thanks to thee, father! these are words of power,
   And I do feel their strength. Beneath that hand,
   Which hath in mercy stricken me, I bow;
   Yea bow, the nobler and the bolder grown
   For such humility.—
 Familiarly. 
How goes the time?
   Does day begin to dawn?

Mar.
   Grey light peeps faintly o'er the eastern towers.

Ray.
   The time is then advanced; we'll husband it.
   Come close to me, my friends.

 Taking Hardibrand and Mardonio each by the hand, and pressing them close to his breast.
   Of worldly cares, upon my mind there rest
   But only those which I have mention'd to you.
   Yet, in this solemn hour, let me remind you:—
   My poor Elizabeth—

Har.

 eagerly .
                                            Thou'st said enough:
   She is my child and heiress of my lands
   To the last rood.—Ah! what avails it now!

Ray.
   How shall a dying man find thanks for this,
   Whose day is closed? I will attempt no thanks.
   The other wish that closely presses on me:—
   Mardonio, upon thee must hang this boon:—
   That miserable man of whom I've told you;
   Now living in the hell of his remorse,
   Cut off from human intercourse; whose vision
   Of midnight horrors saved this hand from blood:
   I fain—

Har.

 again eagerly interrupting him .
                                            Fear not! fear not! he shall be saved;
   And shall with human beings yet consort
   In blessed charity, if ghostly care
   From holiest men procured, or off'rings made
   To ev'ry sacred shrine on christian ground
   Can give him peace.

Ray.

 smiling and pressing Hardibrand to his bosom .
   With all the prompt and gen'rous profusion
   Of eager youth dost thou, mine aged friend,
   Take every thing upon thee. Be it so.
   And good Mardonio with his sober counsel
   Will aid thy bounty. Here I join your hands:
   My worldly cares are closed.

Enter

Elizabeth , followed by Richard and Bertram , who remain on the background whilst she comes slowly forward ; Rayner turning round on hearing them enter.
   Ah! who is this?
   Alas! alas! it is Elizabeth.

 Holding out his hand to her.
   Advance, my love; thou'rt ever welcome here.
   How does it fare with thee?

Eliz.
   It is all mist and darkness with me now;
   I know not how it fares with me.

Ray.
                                            Alas!
   Thou gentle soul! a dark cloud o'er thee hangs,
   But through the gloom the sun again will break,
   And, in the soberness of calm remembrance,
   Thou wilt look back upon misfortunes past
   Like tempests that are laid. Thou dost not heed me:
   Thou dost not speak to me. Alas! Alas!
   What shall I say to thee?
   I've loved thee well, and would have loved thee long,
   Had it so been—but thou shalt be beloved!
   Heav'n will take charge of thee when I'm at rest:
   The kindly and the good shall be thy kindred,

 Putting her hand in Hardibrand ' s.
   And ev'ry sorrowful and gentle heart
   Shall knit itself to thee, and call thee sister.

 Elizabeth makes a motion with her hand as if she would speak, and he pauses, but she is silent.
   What meant, my love, that motion of thy hand?

Mar.
   She fain would speak to thee, but has no voice.

Ray.
   I know it well, Elizabeth; no voice
   Needst thou to tell me how thou'st dearly loved me,
   And dearly do I prize it; 'tis my pride;
   E'en humbled as I am, it is my pride.
   Heav'n's dearest blessings rest upon thy head!—
   And now, since we must part, do in thy love,
   Do for me this last grace; bid me farewell,
   And let my earthly sorrows now be closed.
   Heav'n's blessing rest upon thee!


 He kisses her, and she turns to go away , Rayner looking after her as she goes, but presently returns again.
Ray.
   Thou art return'd, my soul, what wouldst thou have?

Eliz.

 in a broken voice .
   A thought—a wish did press upon my heart,
   But it is gone.

Ray.
                                            I thank thee for thy wish;
   It is a good one, though thou canst not speak it,
   And it will do me good. But leave me! leave me!
   Thou wilt unfit me for a task of strength.

 Elizabeth again attempts to go away, but still returns.
   Ah, wherefore still! wilt thou be cruel to me?



 
Eliz.
   O, no! O, no! I know not what I do:
   It is all mist and darkness with me now:
   I look upon thee, but I see thee not.
   Let me once more but feel thy hand in mine
   And send me where ye will: my being then
   Is at an end.


 They embrace again, and she still continues to hang upon him.
Ray.

 to Bertram and Richard .
   O, lead her hence, and have some mercy on me!
   My father died i' the field a valiant death,
   And shall his son upon the scaffold die
   O'ercome and weak, reft of that decent firmness
   Which e'en the base and vulgar there assume?
   O lead her hence! in mercy lead her hence!


 Bertram and Richard tear her from him, and lead her away, whilst he turns his back, and hides his face with his hands.
Eliz.

 stopping short, and tossing up her arms distractedly as they are leading her out .
   Reprieve, reprieve! I hear a voice i' the air!
   I hear it yet again!

Ray.

 uncovering his face, and looking about eagerly, whilst Hardibrand rushes forward impetuously from the bottom of the stage, where he has been pacing backward and forward with hasty strides .
   Is't any thing?

Mar.
   Alas, no! all is silent: 'tis the fancy
   Of fond distraction list'ning to itself.

Har.
   Nay, it was something: Bertram, thou didst hear it?

Ber.
   No, I heard nothing.

Har.
   What, nor thou, good Richard?

Rich.
   No, nothing.

Eliz.

 holding up her arm distractedly as Richard and Bertram lead her off .
   And is it nothing? no redemption near!



 Exeunt Elizabeth, Richard , and Bertram , whilst Rayner , uttering a deep groan, hides his face, and Hardibrand returns with hasty strides to the bottom of the stage.
Ray.

 uncovering his face .
   Is she gone now?

Mar.
   She is.

Ray.
   Thank God for it! Now to our task:

 Stepping forward with assumed firmness.
   What of it now remains we shall o'er-master.
   Pray thee how goes the time? But pardon me!
   I have too oft inquired how goes the time:
   It is my weakness.

Mar.
                                            The morning now advances.

Ray.
   So I reckon'd.
   We too shall put ourselves in forwardness:
   And so, good father, to your ghostly guidance
   I do commend myself.


Enter Gaoler.
Gaoler.
   The officers of justice are arrived,
   And wait the presence of the prisoner.

Ray.
   They come upon us sooner than we wist;
   But 'tis so much the better.

 To Mardonio , aside. 
   Shall we have time allow'd us for retirement,
   Before they lead me forth?

Mar.
                                            'Tis ever so allow'd.

Ray.
   Come then, I feel me stronger than I was:
   'Twill soon be past; the work goes on apace.

 Taking hold of Hardibrand and Mardonio as he goes out.
   Your arm, I pray:—I know not how it is;
   My head feels dizzy, but my limbs are firm.
   Good Hardibrand, thinkst thou I shall disgrace thee?

Har.
   No, by the mass! I'll give them this old carcase
   To hack for crow's meat if thou shrinkst one hair's breadth
   From the comportment of a gallant soldier,
   And of a brave man's son.

Ray.

 smiling with a gratified look .
   I thank thee.
   Methinks I tread now, as I onward move,
   With more elastic and dilating step,
   As if a spirit of pride within me stirr'd
   Buoying me up on the swoln billow's ridge.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
An outer garden-room or portico in the house where

Zaterloo is concealed. Enter Countess and a confessor, with two attendants bearing Zaterloo on a small couch, which they set down on the middle of the stage; the attendants retire.
Countess.
   The air revives him: look, I pray thee, father,
   How the fresh air revives him: say not then
   All hope is banish'd quite.—Thou shak'st thy head:
   But whilst I see upon his moving breast
   One heave of breath, betok'ning life within,
   I'll grasp at hope, and will not let it go.

 Bending over the couch. 
   My son, my son! hearst thou my voice, my son?

Zat.
   Yes, mother: I have had a fearful struggle.
   'Tis a strong enemy that grapples with me,
   And I must yield to him.—O pious father!
   Pray thou for mercy on me.

Countess.
                                            Yes, my son,
   This holy man shall pray for thee; the shrines
   Of holiest saints be gifted for thee; masses
   And sacred hymns be chanted for thy peace:—
   And thou thyself, even 'midst thine agony,
   Hast spoken precious words of heav'nly grace;
   Therefore be comforted.

Zat.

 shaking his head .
   There is no comfort here: dark, veil'd, and terrible,
   That which abides me; and how short a space—

Countess.
   O thou mayst yet recover!

Con.
   Lady, forbear! this is no time to soothe


 
   With flatt'ring hopes: his term is near its close;
   Therefore, I do again entreat it of you,
   Sond off the messenger with his confession,
   Lest it should be too late to save the innocent,
   And he be sent unto his long account
   With a most heavy charge upon his head.

Countess.
   Thou mak'st me tremble.—Ho! There, you without!
   Send here the messenger.

 Calling off the stage. 
                                            —His steed is ready:
   He shall forthwith depart.


Enter Messenger.
Con.

 to messenger .
   Take thou this packet, and with full-bent speed
   Go to the city to the governor,
   And see that into his own hand thou give it,
   With charges that he read it instantly.
   It is of precious moment to his life
   Who on the scaffold should this morning suffer.
   Quick mount thy horse: few minutes' goaded speed
   Will take thee to the gates.

Mes.
   Few minutes' goaded speed, five leagues to master!

Con.
   Five leagues! thou'rt mad.

Mes.
                                            No, marry! know ye not
   The flooded river hath last night broken down
   The nearer bridge?

Con.
                                            What, art thou sure of this?

Mes.
   I am now come from gazing on the sight.
   From bank to bank the red swoln river roars;
   And on the deep and slowly-rolling mass
   Of its strong centre-tide, grumly and dark,
   The wrecks of cottages, whole ricks of grain,
   Trunks of huge trees, torn by the roots,—ay, save us!
   And floating carcases of perish'd things,
   Bloated and black, are borne along; whilst currents
   Cross-set and furious, meeting adverse streams
   On rude uneven surface, far beyond
   The water's natural bed, do loudly war
   And terrible contest hold; and swelt'ring eddies
   With dizzy whirling fury, toss aloft
   Their surgy waves i' the air, and scatter round
   Their ceaseless bick'ring gleams of jagged foam,
   All fiercely whit'ning in the morning light.
   Crowds now are standing upon either shore
   In awful silence; not a sound is heard
   But the flood's awful voice, and from the city
   A dismal bell heard through the air by starts,
   Already tolling for the execution.

Con.
   What's to be done? fate seems to war against us.
   No, no! we'll not despair! Mount thy fleet horse,
   Life and death's in thy speed:—
   Let nought one moment stop thee on thy way:
   All things are possible to vig'rous zeal:
   Life and death's in thy speed: depart! depart!
   And heaven be with thine efforts.


 Exit messenger, after receiving the packet.
Zat.
   Is he gone? is it done?

Con.
   Yes, he is gone: God grant he be in time,
   For unto human reck'ning 'tis impossible!

 To countess, with an upbraiding look.
   Half an hour sooner—

Countess.
                                            Oh, torment me not!
   Who could foresee this hind'rance?—O, good father!
   Look to thy penitent. Upon his count'nance
   There's something new and terrible. Speak to him:
   Go close to him, good father. O my son!

Zat.
   I feel within me now—this is the feeling:
   I am upon the brink, the dreadful brink:
   It is a fearful gulf I have to shoot.
   O yet support me! in this racking pain
   I still may hold a space the grasp of life,
   And keep back from the dark and horrid—Oh!

 Uttering a deep groan. 
   It is upon me!


 Struggles and expires with a faint groan. Countess, wringing her hands in agony of grief, is hurried off the stage by the Confessor and attendants, who rush in and take hold of her.
SCENE IV.
An open square before the great gate of the prison: a crowd of spectators, with guards, &c., are discovered, waiting for the coming forth of Rayner to his execution, and a solemn bell is heard at intervals. The gate opens, and enter Rayner walking between Mardonio and Hardibrand , and followed by Richard and Bertram , preceded and followed by guards, officers, &c. The procession moves slowly over the stage, and exeunt, followed by the greater part of the crowd, though a good many of them still remain upon the stage. Then re-enter Hardibrand and Richard , followed by one or two of the crowd: Hardibrand walking up and down in a perturbed manner, and Richard leaning his back against the side-scene, where he continues motionless with his eyes fixed on the ground. The murmur of the multitude is heard for some time without, and then ceases, followed by a dead silence.
 st crowd.
The sound of the multitude is still now.
 d crowd

 looking out .
I fancy, by the crowd who stand all gathered round yonder in dead silence, he is now preparing for the block.
 d crowd.
It must be so: mercy on us, what a mantle of human faces there be spread round on every side, and not one sound of voice amongst them all!
Har.

 starting and stopping suddenly, to  st crowd. A long pause.
Didst thou hear aught?
 st crowd.
No, they are still silent.


 
Har.
Look out, I pray thee, and tell me what thou seest. What dost thou gaze at with so broad an eye?
 st crowd looks out.

 st crowd.
The executioner is now mounted upon the platform, and the prisoner—O! I cannot look any more!

 A loud confused noise is heard without.
Har.
What's that?
 d crowd.
It is like the cry of a great multitude, when they look upon something that is terrible.
 st crowd.
Then the stroke is given, and it is all over now.

 Hardibrand turns hastily away, and rushes to the other end of the stage, whilst Richard gives a heavy groan, and still remains motionless. A shout is heard without.
Har.

 returning furiously from the bottom of the stage .
More of that horrible din!— May they bring down the welkin on their heads!
 d crowd

 to  st crowd .
What art thou looking at now?
 st crowd.
Nay, there is nothing to look at now: the platform is down, and the crowd is returning home again.

Enter Ohio , running across the stage.
Ohio.
I've done it! I've done it! I've done it!

 Exit.

Enter a messenger in great haste, followed by a civil Officer.
 st crowd.
   Where are you running to so fast?

Mes.
   Is the execution over?

 st crowd.
   Yes, it is over.

Mes.
   Ah! then I am too late.

 st crowd.
   What mean ye by that?

Mes.
   I brought a pardon for him.

Har.

 rushing upon the messenger and collaring him .
   A pardon! O confound your tardy speed!
   Had you upon some paltry wager striv'n,
   You had run faster. O, thou cursed fool!
   O hadst thou sped, I'd make a rich man of thee!

Mes.

 disentangling himself .
   My steed and I across the high-swoln flood,
   Those on the shore shrieking to see our boldness,
   Have fearless swum some miles short of the pass
   Which we must else have gain'd, or, by my faith,
   I had been later.

Har.
   Thou liest, thou cursed fool! thou shouldst have sped
   Swift as a bullet from the cannon's mouth.


 Collaring him again.

Enter Rayner, Mardonio, Bertram , and crowd.
Mar.

 to Hardibrand , pulling him back from the messenger .
   Hold, general! what hath the poor man done?

Har.
   What has he done! he's brought a pardon, fiend!

 The crowd give a great shout, crying out “Pardon, pardon,” and Hardibrand , turning round at the noise, and seeing Rayner , springs forward, and catches him in his arms.
   God bless us all, and let us keep our wits!
   Is this true seeing that my eyes are blest with?
   O welcome, welcome! this is wonderful!
   My boy! my noble boy! my gallant boy!
   Thou art a man again, and I—I'm mad:
   My head wheels round, but 'tis a blessed madness.
   What sayst thou? art thou silent?
   Hast no voice?

Ray.
   To be upon the verge of death is awful;
   And awful from that verge to be recall'd.
   God bless you! O God bless you! I am spent;
   But let me draw my breath a little while,
   And I will thank you—I will—Bear with me:
   I cannot speak.

 Recovering himself, and seeing the crowd gather round him with joyful and sympathising looks.
   Surely 'tis a kind world I have return'd to;
   There's sympathy and love in ev'ry heart.

Mar.

 to messenger .
   Where is the pardon? let me have it, friend,
   That I may read it.

 Messenger gives him a paper, which he reads.
   We charge thee upon our authority to set the—

 Reading the rest low to himself.
   What! call ye this a pardon which acquits
   The prisoner as guiltless of the crime?
   May God be praised! how has all this been?

Mess.
   Count Zaterloo, who on his death-bed lies,
   In deep remorse, a paper of confession,
   Attested by a priest and his own mother,
   Caused to be drawn, which to the governor
   I've brought, I wot, as quickly as I might,
   Though
 pointing to Hardibrand 
this good gentleman—

Har.

 embracing the messenger .
   O no! O no! thou'rt a brave fellow now,
   And, as I've said, I'll make a rich man of thee.
   But I'm bewilder'd still: how hath it been
   That he is saved, seeing no pardon reach'd him?

Mar.
   Yes, thou mayst wonder! for some unknown friend
   Had sawn across the main prop of the scaffold,
   So that the headsman mounting first, the platform
   Fell with a crash; and he, all maim'd and bruised,
   Unfit to do his office, was perforce—

Har.
   Ay, ay, 'tis plain, thou needst not tell me more.—
   But he, the unknown friend—


Enter Ohio , running exultingly.
Ohio.
                                            'Twas I that did it!
   Beat me and scourge me as ye list: I did it!


 
   He offer'd me his cloak: he pitied me;
   And I have paid him back.

Har.
   Ha! well done and well said, my brave black thing!
   Art thou a prince? in faith I think thou art.
   I'll take thee home, and make a man of thee.
   No, no!

 Pointing to Rayner .
   Here is my son, my heir, my child:
   All that I have is his: he will reward thee.
   Thou hast a gen'rous mind, although debased
   With vile oppression and unmanly scorn.

Ray.

 taking Ohio and Hardibrand both by the hand .
   What shall I say to you? my heart would speak
   What my voice cannot. O! and here comes one
   Who mocks all power of words.


 Enter Elizabeth running, and rushes into Rayner ' s arms; the crowd then eagerly gathers round them, and closes upon them.
Mar.

 stepping out from the crowd, and looking upon them .
   Yes, gather round him, kindly souls, though rude,
   In the true artless sympathy of nature;
   For he is one o'er whom the storm has roll'd
   In awful power, but spared the thunderbolt.—
   When urged by strong temptation to the brink
   Of guilt and ruin, stands the virtuous mind
   With scarce a step between; all pitying heaven,
   Severe in mercy, chast'ning in its love,
   Ofttimes, in dark and awful visitation,
   Doth interpose, and leads the wand'rer back
   To the straight path, to be for ever after
   A firm, undaunted, onward-bearing traveller
   Strong in humility, who swerves no more.


 Exeunt.


CONSTANTINE PALEOLOGUS; OR, THE LAST OF THE CÆSARS: A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Constantine Paleologus , emperor of the Greeks.

Mahomet , the Turkish Sultan.

Othus , a learned Greek, Friends of Constantine , and belonging to his brave band of volunteers.

Rodrigo , a Genoese naval commander, Friends of Constantine , and belonging to his brave band of volunteers.

Justiniani , a noble Genoese, and a soldier, Friends of Constantine , and belonging to his brave band of volunteers.

Petronius , Greeks, and secret agents of Mahomet .

Marthon , Greeks, and secret agents of Mahomet .

Osmir , vizir to Mahomet .

Heugho , an old domestic officer of Constantine .

Othoric , a rude but generous adventurer.

Fortune-teller, citizens, attendants, & c.

WOMEN Valeria , wife of Constantine .

Ella , daughter of Petronius .

Lucia , a lady attendant on Valeria .

Ladies and attendants.



The Scene in Constantinople, and in the camp of Mahomet , near the city.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A large platform on the roof of the palace of Petronius , from which are seen spires and towers, and the broken roofs of houses, &c., with the general appearance of a ruined city, the distant parts involved in smoke. Ella is discovered with an attendant, standing on a balcony belonging to a small tower, rising from the side of the platform. As the curtain draws up the sound of artillery is heard.

Enter Othus and Marthon .
Othus.
   Ah, see how sadly changed the prospect is
   Since first from our high station we beheld
   This dismal siege begin! 'Midst level ruin,
   Our city now shows but its batter'd towers,
   Like the jagg'd bones of some huge animal,
   Whose other parts the mould'ring hand of time
   To dust resolves.

Mar.

 coldly .
   It does indeed some faint resemblance hold
   To what thou hast compared it to. How is't?
   Art thou not from the walls?

Othus.
   No, not immediately.

Mar.
   Wast thou not there when Mahomet's huge cannon
   Open'd its brazen mouth and spoke to us?
   How brook'd thine ears that deep tremendous sound?
   The coasts of Asia and th' Olympian heights,
   Our land-begirded seas, and distant isles,
   Spoke back to him again, in his own voice,
   A deep and surly answer; but our city,
   This last imperial seat of Roman greatness:
   This head of the world, this superb successor
   Of the earth's mistress, where so many Cæsars
   In proud successive lines have held their sway,
   What answer sent she back?

Othus.
   Fy, hold thy tongue!
   Methinks thou hast a pleasure in the thought.
   This head o' the world—this superb successor
   Of the earth's mistress, as thou vainly speakst,
   Stands 'mid these ages, as in the wide ocean
   The last spared fragment of a spacious land,
   That in some grand and awful ministration
   Of mighty nature has ingulfed been,
   Doth lift aloft its dark and rocky cliffs
   O'er the wild waste around, and sadly frowns
   In lonely majesty. But shame upon it!
   Her feeble, worthless, and degen'rate sons—

Mar.
   Yes, what sayst thou of them? they also are
   The fragments of a brave and mighty race,
   Left on this lonely rock.

Othus.
   No, blast them! on its frowning sides they cluster
   Like silly sea-fowl from their burrow'd holes,
   Who, staring senseless on th' invader's toil,
   Stretch out their worthless necks, and cry “caw! caw!”
   O, Paleologus! how art thou left,


 
   Thou and thy little band of valiant friends,
   To set your manly bosoms 'gainst the tide!
   Ye are the last sparks of a wasted pyre
   Which soon shall be trodd'n out.—
   Ye are the last green bough of an old oak,
   Blasted and bare: the lovelier do ye seem
   For its wan barrenness; but to its root
   The axe is brought, and with it ye must fall.—
   Ye are—O God! it grasps my swelling throat
   To think of what ye are.

Mar.
   A brave band, truly:—
   But still our gallant emp'ror and his friends,
   Opposed to Mah'met and his num'rous host
   With all his warlike engines, are in truth
   As if one toss'd against the whirl'd-up sands
   Of their Arabian plains, one grasp of dust.

Othus.
   Yes, they are few in number, but they are
   The essence and true spirit of their kind;
   The soul of thousands. A brave band they are,
   Not levied by the power and wealth of states;
   And the best feelings of the human heart
   Have been the agents of their princely chief,
   Recruiting nobly. Virtuous Sympathy,
   Who on the weaker and deserted side
   Her ample, lib'ral front doth ever range;
   Keen Indignation, who, with clenched hand
   And sternly-flashing eye, ever beholds
   The high o'erbearing crest of proud oppression;
   And gen'rous Admiration, above all,
   Of noble deeds, whose heav'n-enlighten'd smile,
   And imitative motion, ever wake
   With eager heart-throbs at the glorious sight
   Of manly daring, have unto their numbers
   Some score of dauntless spirits lately added;
   Such as would ride upon the whirlwind's back,
   If it might be, and with heaven's spearmen cope.
   With such a band, methinks, all things are possible.

Mar.

 smiling .
   Why, thou soft man of peace,
   Who in gay banquets spend'st thy giddy nights,
   And o'er some sculptured stone, or ancient lore,
   Each idle morning wast'st in the cool shade,
   Thou speakest with a bold and warlike voice!

Othus

 throwing back his cloak, and showing under it a warlike garb, with the scarf and devices belonging to the imperial band .
   Ay, and wear, too, a bold and warlike form.
   Behold what now I am? Thou shrinkest back,
   And lookest strangely on me: give thy lips
   No friendly blessing to my new estate?

Mar.
   Heaven bless the brave!

Othus.
   Amen! but thou art cold.

 Sound of artillery is heard again.
                                            O hear that sound!
   Doth it not stir thee as it thund'ring growls
   Along the distant shore?

 Shaking his head.
                                            It moves thee not.
   Is that the sound of female voices near us?

Mar.
   Yes; seest thou not on yon high balcony
   That pale and fearful maid? her watchful ear
   Is ever turn'd to ev'ry distant sound.

Othus.
   My gentle kinswoman upon the watch!
   I know for whom she fears; nor do I marvel;
   For she was present on that crowded shore,
   When Genoa's captain brought his gen'rous succour,
   And saw the brave contention of those men,
   In their proud vessels bearing boldly on,
   With wavy pendants floating on the wind,
   Whose armed sides, like to a goodly bank,
   Breasted the onward tide of opposition.

 Speaking with a great deal of appropriate gesture.
   No wonder that her fancy has been moved!
   Oh, it did stir the women on our walls—
   The infants—yea, the very household curs,
   That from their kennels turn'd to look upon it!—
   But for that motley crowd of moving things
   Which we miscall our men—Nay, by the light,
   Thou too dost hear me with a frozen eye!


Enter Ella hastily from the balcony, and puts her hand eagerly upon the shoulder of Othus , who turns round surprised.
Ella.
   What sayest thou of him? where fights he now?
   Or on the land, or on some floating fence?

Othus.
   Of whom speakst thou, fair Ella?

Ella.
   Nay, nay! thou knowst right well. Did I not see thee,
   High as I stood, e'en now, tossing thine arms,
   And motioning thy tale with such fit gestures
   As image ships and sails, and daring deeds?
   Of whom speak even the beggars in our streets
   When they such action use? Thou knowst right well,
   Of Genoa's captain, and of none but him.
   Didst see him from the walls?

Othus

 smiling .
                                            My little kinswoman,
   Thou lookest with a keen and martial eye
   As thou dost question me: I saw him not;
   I come not from the walls.

Ella.
   Didst thou not talk of him as I descended?

Othus.
   Yes, of that noble fight.—But dost thou see?
   There are more warriors in the world, Ella,

 Pointing to his dress
   Though men do talk of us, it must be granted,
   With action more composed. Behold me now
   The brave Rodrigo's comrade, and the friend
   Of royal Constantine; who is in truth
   The noblest beast o' the herd, and on the foe
   Turns a bold front, whilst with him boldly join
   A few brave antlers from a timid crowd,
   That quakes and cowers behind.

Ella.
   Yes, Othus, I did mark thy martial garb:
   Heaven's angels bless thee!

Othus.
   And earth's too, gentle Ella.


 Artillery heard again.
Ella

 to Othus , starting fearfully .
   O dost thou smile, and such light words affect,


 
   Whilst ruin growls so near us? hath sad use
   Made misery and sport, and death and merriment, amiliar neighbours?—I'll into my chamber.


Enter Petronius and a disguised Turk.
Pet.

 sternly to Ella .
   Yes, to thy chamber go: thou liv'st, methinks
   On the house-top, or watching in the towers.
   I like it not; and maiden privacy
   Becomes thy state and years.
 To Othus .
Ha! art thou Othus?
   Thou'rt well accoutred, sooth! I knew thee not.

Mar.
   Yes, he is now a valiant soldier grown:
   His Grecian lute, and pen, and books of grace
   Are thrown aside, and the soft letter'd sage
   Grasps a rude lance.

Ella.
   Nay, mock him not, for it is nobly done.

Pet.

 sternly to Ella .
   Art thou still here?

 Exit Ella , abashed and chidden.
   And now, my lord,—


 Turning to Othus .
Othus

 angrily .
   And now, my lord, good evening:
   I too, belike, shall trespass on your patience,
   If longer I remain.


 Exit
Pet.
   Well, let him go, it suits our purpose better.

 Exit.
   But who could e'er have thought in warlike garb
   To see him guised? He, too, become a fool!

Mar.
   He thought, as well I guess, to move me also
   His brave devoted brotherhood to join:
   This was his errand here.

Pet.
   I do believe it well: for Constantine,
   With many fair and princely qualities
   That in his clear morn no attention drew,
   Now, on the brow of dark adversity,
   Hangs like a rainbow on a surly cloud,
   And all men look to him. But what avails
   This growing sentiment of admiration
   To our good means? Good Turk, where, is thy gold?

Turk

 giving him a bag .
   There, Christian, whom
   I may not well call good.

Pet.
   That as thou wilt: but Mahomet, thy master,
   Shall find me still his faithful agent here.
   This very night, as I have promised to him,
   The people shall in insurrection rise,
   Clam'ring to have the city yielded up;
   And if your narrow caution stint me not
   In that which rules the storm, it shall be raised
   To the full pitch.

Turk.
   And what is that, Petronius?

Pet.
   More gold. Ay, by thy turban and thy beard!
   There is a way to make our timid sluggards
   The sultan's work within these walls perform
   Better than armed men.

Turk.
   And what is that, I pray?

Pet.
   Why, more gold still.—
   I have in pay, besides our mutinous rabble,
   Who bawl, and prate, and murmur in our streets,
   Prophets, and conjurors, and vision-seers,
   And wise men, not a few, whose secret haunts
   The timid flock to: many are the palms
   That must be touch'd.—There are within our walls
   Of idle, slothful citizens, enow,
   If with their active master they should join,
   Still to defend them: therefore, be assured,
   He who shall keep this fickle, wav'ring herd
   From such wise union, shall to Mah'met give
   This mistress of the East.

Turk.
   Fear not; thou shalt be satisfied.

Pet.
   Right: let us now to work: 'tis near the time
   When, from the walls returning with his friends,
   The emperor his ev'ning hour enjoys,
   And puts off warlike cares: now let us forth,
   And urge those varlets on.

 To Marthon .
   Do thou into the eastern quarter go,
   And stir them up. Where is our trusty Gorbus?
   The western is his province. Send him hither:
   We must some counsel hold: meantime within
   I wait his coming. Be thou speedy, Marthon.

 Exit Marthon . To the Turk. 
   Remember, friend.

Turk.
   Thou shalt be satisfied.

Pet.
   Good fortune smile upon us!


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A state apartment in the imperial palace, with splendid sideboards, set forth, on which are seen cups and goblets, &c. as if prepared for a grand repast, and several domestics crossing the stage, carrying different things in their hands. Enter Heugho , followed by a stranger and two inferior domestic officers.
Heugho

 after looking over every thing .
   Is nought omitted here? the rubied platters
   And the imperial cup—I see them not.

 st offi.
   What boots it now, encompass'd thus with foes,
   And death and ruin grinning at our side,
   To set forth all this sumptuous garniture,
   Which soon shall in a Turkish harem shine?
   The emp'ror heeds it not.

Heugho

 stamping with his foot .
                                            Dog, but I heed it!
   And were the floating remnant of a wreck,
   With the sea bellowing round it, all that now
   Remain'd of the eastern empire, I thereon,
   Until the last wave wash'd us from its side,
   Would humbly offer to brave Constantine
   The homage due to mine imperial lord.
   Out on thee, paltry hind! go fetch them hither.


 Exit officer.
Stranger.
   This is the hour, you say, when Constantine,


 
   Like a tired woodman from his daily toil,
   Unclasps his girded breast; and with his friends
   Enjoys his social meal right cheerfully
   For one so overshadow'd with dark fate.
   I am a stranger here, and, by your leave,
   I fain would tarry still to have one view
   Of his most noble countenance.

Heugho.
                                            Thou'rt welcome.
   And, gentle stranger, thou wilt see a prince,
   Who ably might have reign'd, had not his heart
   To the soft shades of friendly intercourse
   Still turn'd, as to its true and native place:
   A prince with loving friends, but lacking troops:
   Rich in the dear good-will of gen'rous minds,
   But poor in kingly allies. One thou'lt see,
   Whose manly faculties, beset with gifts
   Of gentler grace, and soft domestic habits,
   And kindliest feelings, have within him grown
   Like a young forest-tree, beset and 'tangled,
   And almost hidd'n with sweet incumb'ring shrubs;
   That, till the rude blast rends this clust'ring robe,
   Its goodly hardy stem to the fair light
   Discovers not. Hark! now they come!

 Flourish of trumpets.
   Stand thou secure, and see whate'er thou wilt.

 Calling to some people off the stage
   Ho! you without! move there with more despatch.


 Several domestics again cross the stage as before.
Stranger.
   See, yonder come the brave imperial friends,
   If right I guess. They bear a noble mien.
   And who is he who foremost walks with steps
   Of gravely-measured length, and heavy eyes
   Fix'd on the ground?


 Pointing off the stage.
Heugho.
   That is Justiniani; a brave soldier,
   Who doth o' tiptoe walk, with jealous care,
   Upon the very point and highest ridge
   Of honour's path, demure and circumspect,
   Like nicest maid, proud of her spotless fame;
   A steady, cheerless friend.

Stranger.
   And who is he with open, lib'ral front,
   Who follows next?

Heugho.
   He is the brave Rodrigo;
   That Genoese, who, with four gallant ships,
   Did in the front of the whole Turkish fleet
   So lately force his passage to our port,
   Bearing us gen'rous and most needful succour.
   Does he not look like one, who in the fight
   Would fiercely strive, yet to the humbled foe
   Give quarter pleasantly?

Stranger.
   And who comes after with more polish'd aspect,
   But yet, methinks, keen and intelligent?

Heugho.
   Oh, that is Othus; a soft letter'd sage,
   Who wears his soldier's garb with its first gloss.

Stranger.
   Constantine comes not yet?

Heugho.
   No; first of all to his imperial dame,
   Who o'er his mind a greater influence has
   Than may, perhaps, with graver wisdom suit,
   Being a dame of keen and lofty passions,
   Though with fair virtues graced, he ever pays
   His dear devotions: he will join them shortly.
   But softly, here they are.


Enter Justiniani, Rodrigo, Othus , and many others of the Emperor's friends, armed as if returned from the walls.
Rod.

 to Justiniani .
   Thou'rt sternly grave: has aught in this day's fight
   Befall'n, thy eager temper to disturb?

Just.
   Your first directed fire should, in good right,
   Have been against that Turkish standard sent,
   Rear'd in their front.

Rod.
   And shall we seriously expend our strength
   In paying worship to each Turkish rag
   That waves before our walls?
   But frown not on me, friend: perhaps I'm wrong.
   We who are bred upon a bark's rough side,
   And 'midst the rude contention of the waves,
   Must force our steady purpose, as we may,
   Right in the teeth of all opposing things,
   Wrestling with breakers on the scourged rock,
   Or tilting it with a seal's cub, good faith!
   As it may chance; nought do we know of forms.

Othus.
   Another time, valiant Justiniani,
   With more respect to warlike ceremony
   We will conduct ourselves.
   Rodrigo well hath pled his own excuse;
   And I, thou knowest, am but new in arms.

Just.
   Methinks, e'en to a child it had been plain
   That, when so circumstanced—

Othus.
   Hush, hush, I pray thee, now! the emp'ror comes:
   This is his hour of cheerful relaxation,
   Snatch'd from each circling day of busy cares,
   A faint gleam thrown across a dismal gloom,
   Let us not darken it with petty brawls.


Enter Constantine .
Con.

 saluting them .
   A pleasant meeting to us all, brave friends,
   After our day of toil! There be among us
   Tired limbs that well have carn'd their hour of rest;
   This kindly-social hour, this fleeting bliss
   Of the tired labourer. Undo our bracings,
   And let us sup as lightly as we may.

 Taking off his helmet, which he gives to an attendant.
   This galls me strangely;
   Mine armourer, methinks, has better skill
   To mar men's heads than save them.
   Nay all of you, I pray.

 They all begin to take off their helmets, and part of their armour.
   And gentle Othus too, unbrace thyself:
   How likest thou the gripe of soldiers' gear?

Othus.
   Worn in the cause, for which I wear it now,


 
   It feels like the close hug of a rough friend,
   Awkward but kindly.

Con.
   Thanks, gen'rous Othus! it had pleased me better
   To've had the gentle service of thy pen.
   Thou couldst have told, if so it might have been,
   How brave men acted, and how brave men fell.—
   Well, let it be.

 Turning aside to check his emotion, and then assuming a cheerful face.
   You gallant seamen, in th' applauding view
   Of the throng'd beach, amidst the tempest's rage,
   E'en on the last plank of your sever'd bark,
   Ride it careeringly, my brave Rodrigo!

Rod.
   Yes, royal sir; with brave true-hearted mates
   All things we do and bear right cheerfully.

Con.
   And so will we.—Your hand, my gallant friend!
   And yours, and yours, and yours, my brave Eubedes—
   And noble Carlos too—and all of you—

 Taking all their hands, one after another.
   I am indeed so mated.
   Bring me a cooling cup, I pray, good Heugho,
   My tongue is parch'd.

 Heugho presents a cup to him, kneeling.
   What, wilt thou still upon thine aged limbs
   These cumbrous forms impose? These surly times
   Suit not such ceremony, worthy Heugho.

Heugho.
   Be health and sweet refreshment in the draught,
   My royal master!

Con.

 tasting it .
   And so there is: few cups presented thus
   Come with such kindness. But I have, in truth,
   Shrunk, as a potentate, to such small grasp,
   That now I fairly may put in my claim
   To the affections of a man.—Brave friends,
   Health to you all!

 Drinks, then turning with a smile to Justiniani .
                                            Justiniani, I with thee alone
   Have cause of quarrel in this day's long toil.

Just.
   How so, and please your highness?
   The holy hermit, counting o'er his beads,
   Is not more scrupulous than I have been
   Nought of his sacred duty to omit.

Con.
   Thou putst a gross affront upon the worth
   Of all thy warlike deeds; for thou from them
   Claimst not the privilege to save thyself
   From needless dangers. On the walls this day
   Thou hast exposed thyself like a raw stripling,
   Who is ashamed to turn one step aside
   When the first darts are whizzing past his ear.
   Rodrigo there, beneath a pannier
   Would save his head from the o'er-passing blow,
   Then, like a lion issuing from his den,
   Burst from his shelter with redoubled ardour.
   Pray thee put greater honour on thyself,
   And I will thank thee for it.

Just.
   I stand reproved.

Con.
   I'm glad thou dost.—Now to our social rites!
   No tired banditti in their nightly cave,
   Whose goblets sparkle to the ruddy gleam
   Of blazing faggots, eat their jolly meal
   With toils, and dangers, and uncertainty
   Of what to-morrow brings, more keenly season'd
   Than we do ours.—Spare not, I pray thee, Heugho,
   Thy gen'rous Tuscan cup: I have good friends
   Who prize its flavour much.


 As he turns to go with his friends to the bottom of the stage, where a curtain between the pillars being drawn up, discovers their repast set out; a citizen enters in haste.
Cit.
   I crave to speak unto the emperor.

Con.
   What is thine errand?

Cit.
   My royal sir, the city's in commotion:
   From ev'ry street and alley, ragged varlets
   In crowds pour forth, and threaten mighty things.
   But one, whom I outran, comes on my steps
   To bring a fuller tale.

Con.

 to citizen .
   Thou'rt sure of this?

Cit.
   It is most certain.

Con.

 to Othus .
   What thinkst thou, good Othus?

Othus.
   I doubt it not: 'tis a degraded herd
   That fills your walls. This proud imperial city
   Has been in ages past the great high-way
   Of nations driving their blind millions on
   To death and carnage. Through her gates have pass'd
   Pale cowled monarchs and red-sworded saints,
   Voluptuaries foul, and hard-eyed followers
   Of sordid gain—yea, all detested things.
   She hath a common lake or sludge-pool been,
   In which each passing tide has left behind
   Some noisome sediment. She is choked up
   With mud and garbage to the very brim.
   Her citizens within her would full quietly
   A pagan's slaves become, would he but promise
   The sure continuance of their slothful ease.
   Some few restraints upon their wonted habits
   And Mah'met's gold, no doubt, have roused the fools
   To this unwonted stir.

Con.
   It may be so: I shall wait further tidings.
   Meantime, my friends, go ye, and as ye can,
   Snatch a short soldier's meal.

 They hesitate.
   Nay, go I pray you!
   I must not to my friends say “I command.”
 They all go immediately, and without any order standing round the table, begin to eat.

 To the citizen remaining still on the front of the stage. 

   And so thou sayst—But lo! another messenger.


Enter another Citizen in great haste.
 d cit.
   The citizens in crowds—the men and women—


 
   The very children too—mine eyes have seen it—
   In crowds they come—

Con.
                                            Take breath, and tell thy tale
   Distinctly. From what quarter comest thou?

 d cit.
   I'm from the east.


Enter  d Citizen.
 d cit.
   I come to tell your highness that the city
   Is in commotion; e'en with flesh-forks arm'd,
   And all the implements of glutt'nous sloth,
   The people pour along in bawling crowds,
   Calling out, “bread,” and “Mah'met,” and “surrender,”
   Towards the royal palace.

Con.
   And whence art thou?

 d cit.
   I'm from the western quarter.

Con.
   Ha! spreads it then so wide?

 Calling to his friends at the bottom of the stage.
   Friends, by your leave,
   I somewhat must upon your goodness bear.
   Give me my helmet and my sword again:
   This is no partial fray.


 Beginning to arm, whilst all the rest follow his example.
Rod.
   Well, let us jostle with these ragged craft,
   And see who grapples best.


 Buckling on his armour gaily.
Just.
   A soldier scorns to draw his honour'd blade
   On such mean foes: we'll beat them off with sticks.

Othus.
   Words will, perhaps, our better weapons prove,
   When used as brave men's arms should ever be,
   With skill and boldness. Swords smite single foes,
   But thousands by a word are struck at once.


 As they all gather round Constantine , and are ready to follow him, enter Valeria in great alarm, followed by Lucia , and several ladies.
Val.

 to Constantine .
   O, hast thou heard it?

Con.
   Yes, my love, they've told me.

Val.
   From the high tower my ladies have descried
   The dark spires redd'ning in their torches' light,
   Whilst, like the hoarse waves of a distant sea,
   Their mingled voices sweet as they approach.

Con.
   It is a storm that soon will be o'erblown:
   I will oppose to them a fixed rock,
   Which they may beat against but cannot shake.

Val.
   That is thyself.—O, no! thou shalt not go!
   Yea, I am bold! misfortune mocks at state,
   And strong affection scorns all reverence;
   Therefore, before these lords, e'en upon thee,
   Thou eastern Cæsar, do I boldly lay
   My woman's hand, and say, “thou shalt not go.”

Con.
   Thy woman's hand is stronger, sweet Valeria,
   Than warrior's iron grasp,
   But yet it may not hold me. Strong affection
   Makes thee most fearful where no danger is:
   Shall eastern Cæsar, like a timid hind
   Scared from his watch, conceal his cowering head?
   And does an empire's dame require it of him?

Val.
   Away, away! with all those pompous sounds!
   I know them not. I by thy side have shared
   The public gaze, and the applauding shouts
   Of bending crowds: but I have also shared
   The hour of thy heart's sorrow, still and silent,
   The hour of thy heart's joy. I have supported
   Thine aching head, like the poor wand'rer's wife,
   Who, on his seat of turf, beneath heaven's roof,
   Rests on his way.—The storm beats fiercely on us:
   Our nature suits not with these worldly times,
   To it most adverse. Fortune loves us not;
   She hath for us no good: do we retain
   Her fetters only? No, thou shalt not go!

 Twining her arms round him.
   By that which binds the peasant and the prince,
   The warrior and the slave, all that do bear
   The form and nature of a man, I stay thee!
   Thou shalt not go.

Con.
   Wouldst thou degrade me thus?

Val.
   Wouldst thou unto my bosom give death's pang?
   Thou lov'st me not.

Con.

 with emotion, stretching out his hands to his friends, who stand at some distance .
   My friends, ye see how I am fetter'd here.
   Ye who thus bravely to my fortunes cling
   With generous love, less to redeem their fall
   Than on my waning fate by noble deeds
   To shed a parting ray of dignity:
   Ye gen'rous and devoted; still with you
   I thought to share all dangers: go ye now,
   And to the current of this swelling tide
   Set your brave breasts alone!

 Waving them off with his hand, and then turning to her.
   Now, wife, where wouldst thou lead me?

Val.

 pointing with great energy to the friends who are turning as if to go out .
   There, there! O, there! thou hast no other way.

 Brushing away her tears hastily, and then assuming an air of dignity, she takes Constantine by the hand, and leading him across the stage, presents him to his friends.
   Most valiant, honour'd men, receive your chief,
   Worthy the graceful honours of your love,
   And heaven's protecting angel go with you!


 Exeunt Constantine and his friends, paying obeisance to her as they retire, which she returns with the profoundest respect, continuing to look after them till they are out of sight; then returning to the front of the stage with a deep sigh, remains for some time with her eyes fixed on the ground.
Lucia.
   My dear and royal mistress, be not thus!
   The people will their sov'reign lord respect.



 
Val.
   Will they? Where is my little Georgian maid,
   Whose grandsire, though a brave and sov'reign prince,
   Was piecemeal torn by a ferocious crowd?

Lucia.
   She told a wonderful surcharged tale,
   Perhaps to move your pity: heed it not.

Val.
   Ah! whereunto do all these turmoils tend—
   The wild contention of these fearful times?
   Each day comes bearing on its weight of ills,
   With a to-morrow shadow'd at its back,
   More fearful than itself.—A dark progression—
   And the dark end of all, what will it be?

Lucia.
   Let not such gloomy thoughts your mind o'ercast;
   Our noble emperor has on his side
   The dark and potent powers.

Val.
   What is thy meaning?

Lucia.
   A rarely-gifted man, come from afar,
   Who sees strange visions rise before his sight
   Of things to come, hath solemnly pronounced it,
   That Paleologus has on his side
   The dark and potent powers.

Val.
   Alas! alas! are they the friends of virtue?
   Who told thee this?

Lucia.
   One unto whom he told such marv'llous things
   As did all natural knowledge far exceed.

Val.
   Thou dost impress me with a strange desire,
   As though it were upon my mind impress'd
   By secret supernatural power. Methinks,
   Were this dread night with all its dangers past,
   I too would fain—Ha! hark! what noise is that?

 Listening with great alarm.
   Hark, hark! it is the sound of many sounds,
   Mingled and terrible, though heard afar.

Lucia.
   Shall I ascend the tower, and give you notice
   Whate'er I see?

Val.

 eagerly .
   I'll go myself.


 Exit in great alarm, followed by Lucia and ladies.
ACT II. SCENE I.
An open street before the imperial palace. A crowd of men, women, and children discovered, bearing in their hands torches, with clubs, sticks, & c., and the stage entirely lighted by the red glare of their torches cast up against the walls of the building. The confused noise and clamour of a great crowd is heard as the curtain draws up.
 st crowd.
   Holla! let them come forth who trouble us,
   And love they blood and beating, they shall have it.

 d crowd.
   Surrender! bread and wine, and peaceful days!
   Surrender, devils, or ye shall pay the cost!


 All the crowd call out clamorously, and brandish their torches, &c., in a threatening manner against the palace.
 d crowd.
   Must we, men well instructed, rear'd, and cherish'd,
   The chiefest of all townsmen of the earth;
   We, whom all nations know and look upon
   With envious worship—must we from our meals
   And quiet couches, like your rude barbarians,
   Be scared and roused with the continued bellowing
   Of curst artillery? it is a shame.

 st crowd.
   It is a crying, an insulting shame.
   E'en Mahomet regards our polish'd race
   And rare acquirements; but for Constantine—

 d crowd.
   Ay, ay! let him come forth with his base crew
   Of savage strangers; and should they refuse us,
   E'en with good teeth and nails, fail other means,
   We will do vultures' work upon them all.
 All of them calling out together, and brandishing their torches, &c., as before. 
Holla! holla! we say to you again;
   Emperor! Constantine! come forth to us!


 A grand door of the palace opens, from which two flights of stairs descend into the street, and Constantine , with his friends, appear coming out upon the landing-place. The crowd raise a great noise upon seeing him, and he stretches out his hand as if he wished to speak, but they still continue loud and clamorous.
Con.
   Audience, if that your sov'reign may command it!

 th crowd.
   Yes, let us hear what he will say to us.

 Several together. 
   There is no harm in that: peace all of you!

Con.
   Behold me at your wish, assembled citizens:
   Was it the voice of children or of foes
   That call'd me forth?

 d crowd.
   Go to with mocking words! are we thy children?

Con.
   Ye say, indeed, too truly! children do
   Support, and honour, and obey their sire:
   They put their aiding hand to every burden
   That presses on him: ever gather round him
   When dark misfortune lowers; and, strong in them,
   He lifts his honour'd head amidst the storm,
   Blessing and bless'd.
   But I have stood in the dark pass alone,
   Facing its fiercest onset. In your homes
   Ye've stretch'd your easy limbs and fann'd your brows,
   Whilst I in parching toil have spent the day,
   Aided by strangers. Ye too truly say
   “Are we thy children?”—When my sky was clear,
   Ye follow'd me with fond applauding love,


 
   And bade God bless your sire; but when it lower'd,
   Back to your homes ye shrank, and gen'rous strangers
   Are by my side where children should have stood.
 A confused murmur rises amongst them, and some call out .
He speaks good reason, neighbours.

 Others call out. 
   Out on it! all fair words!

 Others. 
   Peace, sirs! we'll hear him out.

 Others. 
   No! no! no! no!


 Brandishing their torches violently.
Othoric

 breaking through them with a great club in his hands .
   Peace, friends, I say! I am a strong Hungarian,
   And I will hear him out.


 The clamour subsides.
Con.
   Yes, when the tempest lower'd, ye shrank away.
   But if some gen'rous shame has moved you now—
   If, thus assembled, with repentant zeal
   Ye would return, behold these open'd arms!
   O there be still amongst you men sufficient
   To save your city, your domestic roofs,
   Your wives, your children, all that good men love;
   Were each one willing for a little term
   To face but half the dangers which perforce
   Not doing this, he stands exposed to;
   To bear but half the toils which I bear daily,
   And shall bear lovingly!

 st crowd.
   Go to! surrender and have done with it.
   Who thanks—who calls upon thee for thy toils?

Con.
   That voice, which, in the hour of trial, bids
   The good man give his soft and sensitive frame
   To death and torture, and e'en fearful woman
   Bend her fair neck unto the uplifted stroke,
   Calls upon me—yea, and I will obey it!

Othoric.
   By the good saints, he speaks like a brave man.

 st crowd.
   Acts he like one? will he come down to us?

 Several speaking together. 
   He does; he comes in truth!


 Constantine , after speaking in dumb show to his friends, descends the stairs.
 d crowd.
   Ay, in good faith, he comes unarmed too!

Con.
   No, citizens, unarm'd I am not come;
   For ev'ry good man here some weapon wears
   For my defence.

 th crowd.
   Yes, he says well; and we'll defend him too.

 Several others. 
   And so we will; huzza! huzza! huzza!
   Long live brave Constantine, our noble Emperor!

 Many speaking at once. 
   No, no! peace and surrender is our call!


 Raising loud cries, and brandishing their torches with violent threatening gestures.
 th crowd.
   Hear him out, fools, and he'll perhaps consent
   To hon'rable surrender.

Con.

 to th crowd, and those who range themselves on his side .
   No, friends; if in this hope with me ye stand,
   Turn to your place again; for whilst I breathe,
   With men enough in these encompass'd walls
   To fire one gun, never shall Turkish banner
   Upon our turrets wave. In this firm mind,
   Upon those walls I am content to die,
   By foemen slain, or, if heav'n wills it so,
   Here on this spot, by those I will not name.

Othoric.
   No! we will die first, be it as it may,
   Ere one hair of thy noble head shall fall!

Crowd

 on Constantine ' s side 
   Long live brave Constantine! brave Paleologus!
   Huzza! huzza!

Crowd

 on Constantine's side 
   No; bread, and peace, and Mahomet, say we!


 Both parties call out tumultuously, and threaten one another, and Rodrigo, Justiniani , and Othus rush down amongst them, leaving their other friends to guard the door of the palace.
 d crowd

 to Rodrigo .
   Ay, thou sea-lion! thou too needs must come
   To growl upon us.

Rod.
   No, faith! I know you well: ye are at large
   A set of soft, luxurious, timid slaves,
   On whom a cat with muffled paws might mew,
   And ye would turn from it.—But still amongst you,
   I would upon it pledge my mane and claws,
   There are some honest souls who have ere now
   Quaff'd their full bumpers to a brave man's health,
   And I, in sooth, am come, with their good leave,
   To shake hands with them all.

 Holding out his hand invitingly to the opposite crowd.
   Come; who loves valiant worth and Paleologus,
   Give me his hand.

 Many of the crowd giving him their hands. 
   There is one for thee.

 Second. 
   Ay, and there.
 Third. 
And there.

Rod.

 to one who hesitates .
   And thou, too, for thou wearst upon thy brow
   A soldier's look: I must perforce have thee.

 Casting up his hat in the air, and joined by all the crowd on his side.
   Long live brave Constantine! huzza!


 This they continue to do till the opposite party are dispirited and beat off the stage. Rodrigo then presents his newly-acquired friends to Constantine .
Con.
   I thank you all, my brave and zealous friends.
   Within the palace walls I'll now conduct you,


 
   And marshal there my new-gain'd strength, for which
   I give heaven thanks.


 Exeunt ; Constantine , followed by his friends, &c. Rodrigo walking last, and just about to go off the stage, when Othoric re-enters by the opposite side, and calls after him.
Othoric.
   Hark ye! a word with you, my noble captain.

Rod.

 returning .
   What wouldst thou say?

Othoric.
   Look on my face; my name is Othoric;
   I'm strong, thou seest, and have a daring soul;
   Look on my face; my name is Othoric:
   Thinkst thou thou shalt remember me, though thou
   Shouldst ne'er again behold me?

Rod.
   I shall, my friend: thou hast a daring countenance.

Othoric.
   My deeds shall not belie it. With this crowd
   I came, a stranger of most desp'rate fortune,
   And hired by treach'rous men fell work to do.
   But now, unhired, I'll do for your brave master
   A deed that shall make Turkish ears to tingle,
   And Christian too, or fail it or succeed.

Rod.
   What wilt thou do?

Othoric.
   The consciousness of what one arm performs
   Let one heart keep.

Rod.
   Heaven aid and prosper then thy secret thought,
   If it be good and honest! Fare thee well!


 Exeunt severally.
SCENE II.
A small narrow street, before a private sombre-looking house. Enter Othus and Rodrigo .
Othus.
   Move slowly here, for now we pass the fane,
   In which the mystic vision-seeing sage
   To ears of faith speaks his wild oracles.

Rod.
   What, he of whom we've heard such marv'llous things?

Othus.
   Yes; such perturbed times his harvest prove,
   When anxious minds, in dread of coming ill,
   Would draw aside, impatiently, the veil
   Of dark futurity.—Softly, I pray:
   A female form now issues from the door:
   It moves, methinks, like Ella.


Enter Ella from the house, with a female Attendant.
Rod.

 eagerly .
   It is herself, and I will speak to her.
   Fair maid, as well I guess by that light trip,
   Thy lover's fate hangs on a lucky thread;
   Tough, and well whiten'd in a kindly sun.

Ella.
   Well hast thou guess'd: fortune is passing kind;
   She leads thee, fights for thee, and guards thy head
   From ev'ry foeman's stroke.

Rod.
   Ay, but thy lover, Ella! was it not
   Of him we spoke?

Ella.
   Fy, do not mock me thus!

Othus.
   In truth he mocks thee, Ella, and no faith
   To fates foretold or mystic sages gives.

Rod.
   Believe him not, sweet maid. We seamen, truly,
   Small dealings have with learned sorcery;
   Nor bead, nor book, nor ring, nor mutter'd rhymes,
   Are for our turn: but on the sea-rock's point,
   In shape of hern, or gull, or carrion-bird,
   Our un-feed wizards sit, and, with stretch'd throats,
   Speak strange mysterious things to wave-toss'd men,
   With many perils compass'd. Nay, ofttimes
   The mermaid, seated on her coral throne,
   Spreading her yellow hair to the sunn'd breeze,
   Will sing a song of future fortunes fair
   To him who has the luck to meet with her:
   And e'en the nightly winds will through our shrouds
   Distinctive voices utter unto those,
   Who in their storm-rock'd cradles lie, and think
   Of their far-distant homes.—I do believe
   That all good fortune shall betide thy love,
   Being thy love; for that doth far outdo
   All other fortune; and besides, no doubt,
   A fair and courtly youth.

Ella.
   Go to! go to! thou mockest me again!
   I love a brave man—

Rod.
                                            And not passing fair,
   Nor very courtly?

Othus.
                                            No, nor wearing now
   His youth's best bloom; but somewhat weatherbeaten,
   And sunn'd on sultry shores?

Ella.
   Fy on you both, you hold me in derision!
   I'm young, and all unlearn'd, and well I know
   Not passing sage; but do I merit this?


 Turns to go away from them in tears.
Rod.
   By heavens thou shalt not go!

 Catching hold of her hand to prevent her.
   Thou sweetest thing
   That e'er did fix its lightly-fibred sprays
   To the rude rock, ah! wouldst thou cling to me?
   Rough and storm-worn I am: but if thou lov'st me,—
   Thou truly dost,—I will love thee again
   With true and honest heart, though all unmeet
   To be the mate of such sweet gentleness.

Othus.
   I hear a noise of footsteps: we'll retire;
   Let us pursue our way.

 Looking behind as they go off.
   'Tis one belonging to Valeria's train,
   Who hither comes with quick and eager gait.


 Exeunt.


 
SCENE III.
A large sombre room, with mystical figures and strange characters painted upon the walls, and lighted only by one lamp, burning upon a table near the front of the stage. Enter a Conjuror in a long loose robe, and Petronius , meeting him, by opposite sides.
Pet.
   Well, my good sage, how thrives thy mystic trade?
   Go all things prosperously?

Con.
   As thou couldst wish: to many a citizen
   I have the fix'd decree of fate foretold,
   Which to the Sultan gives this mighty city,
   Making all opposition and defence
   Vain; and their superstition works for us
   Most powerfully.

Pet.
   So far 'tis well; but be thou on thy guard;
   I am expressly come to caution thee.
   Should any visit thee, whom thou suspectest
   To be connected with th' imperial friends,
   Be sure thy visions speak to them of things
   Pleasant to loyal ears.

Con.
   Fear not; I have already been forewarn'd,
   And have such caution follow'd.

Pet.
   Thou hast done wisely: still keep on thy guard,
   And be not e'en surprised if thou, ere long,
   Shouldst have a royal visiter. My agents,
   Who in th' imperial palace are on watch,
   Have giv'n me notice that Valeria's mind
   Is this way bent. If so, let thy delusions
   Still tempt her in the city to remain,
   For herein is the Sultan much concern'd.
   Hash! we are interrupted.


Enter a Servant.
Serv.

 to con. .
   A noble matron craves to speak with thee.

Con.
   Dost thou not know her?

Serv.
                                            No; in a black stole
   She's closely veil'd; yet noble is her gait;
   And her attendant underneath his cloak,
   But ill conceal'd, wears an imperial crest.

Pet. and Con.

 both together .
   Can it indeed be she?


 Pausing to consider.
Con.
   I'll venture it.
 To servant. 
Go and conduct her hither.

 Exit servant.
   It must be she: I'll boldly venture it.

Pet.
   Thou mayst with little risk: meantime, remember
   The caution I have given thee.

Con.
   Trust to my skill, and be a while withdrawn,
   My noble patron.


 Exit Petronius . Enter Valeria , concealed under a long black stole, followed by Lucia and two female attendants, who remain at the bottom of the stage whilst she comes forward.
Con.
   Approach, great dame.

Val.
                                            Yes, in misfortune so;
   That is my eminence: and unto thee
   I come, an anxious suitor, if that truly
   Th' unseen mysterious powers, with whom thou dealst,
   To human weal and woe alliance bear,
   And may unto the care-rack'd mind foreshow
   The path of awful fate that lies before it.
   I do beseech thee!—

Con.
                                            Say thou dost command;
   For through that sable stole, were it as thick
   As midnight's curtain, still I could behold
   Thy keenly-glancing eye, and the dark arch
   Of royal brows accustom'd to command.

Val.
   Ha! dost thou see me?

Con.
   Yea; and who is he,
   Whose shadowy unreal form behind thee towers,
   As link'd with thine though absent? O'er his head
   Th' imperial eagle soars, and in his hand
   He grasps the emblem of supreme command.

Val.

 throwing back the stole with astonishment mixed with fear .
   O, most mysterious and wonderful!
   Nothing is hid from thee: thou seest afar
   The distant death's day of the swathed babe,
   Falling in hoary age, and the life's morn
   Of those who are not.—Here then all confess'd,
   A wretched empress and a trembling wife,
   I stand before thee. O let thy keen eye
   Through the dark mist that limits nature's sight,
   Follow that phantom o'er whose head doth soar
   Th' imperial bird! for, be it good or ill,
   His fate is mine, and in his fate alone
   I seek to know it.

Con.
   And hast thou strength to bear it? art thou firm?
   For that which smites mine eye must smite thine ear.

Val.

 alarmed .
   Thou reck'nest then to look on dreadful things?

Con.
   I may or may not; but with mind not braced
   In its full strength, seek not thy fate to know.

Val.

 after a hesitating pause of great agitation .
   I can bear all things but the dread uncertainty
   Of what I am to bear.

Con.
   Then shall it be unto thee as thou wilt.


 After some mysterious motions and muttering to himself, he turns his face towards the bottom of the stage, as if he had his eye steadfastly fixed upon some distant point; and continues so for some time without moving, whilst she stands, watching his countenance eagerly, with her face turned to the front of the stage.


 
Val.

 impatiently, after a pause .
   O! what dost thou behold?

Con.
   Nay, nothing yet but the dark formless void.
   Be patient and attend.—I see him now:
   On the tower'd wall he stands: the dreadful battle
   Roars round him. Through dark smoke, and sheeted flames,
   And showers of hurtling darts, and hissing balls,
   He strides: beneath his sword falls many a foe:
   His dauntless breast to the full tide of battle
   He nobly gives. Still on through the dark storm
   Mine eye pursues him to his fate's high cope—

Val.
   His fate's high cope! merciful, awful heaven!

 After a pause.
   O, wherefore dost thou pause? thine eyes roll terribly:
   What dost thou see? thou lookst on things most dreadful!
   O look not thus, but say what thou dost see!

Con.
   I see a frowning chief, the crescent's champion,
   In bold defiance meet thy valiant lord.
   The fight is fierce and bloody.—

Val.
   Again thou pausest yet more terribly.—
   Hast thou no utterance for what thou seest?
   O God! O God! thou lookst upon his death!

 Clasping her hands violently.
   Dost thou not speak? wilt thou not answer me?
   Thou lookst upon his death!

Con.
   I look on nothing, for thy frantic terrors
   Have broken the fabric of my air-shaped vision,
   And all is blank.

Val.
   And will it not return to thee again?
   O fix thine eyes, and to it bend thy soul
   Intently, if it still may rise before thee,
   For thou hast made me frantic!

Con.

 after a pause, and fixing his eyes as before .
   The forms again return—
   The champions meet: the fight is fierce and terrible:
   The fateful stroke is given: and Constantine—

Val.
   Merciful heaven!

Con.
   And Constantine lays the proud crescent low.

Val.

 pausing for a moment as if to be assured that she has heard right, and then holding up her hands in ecstasy .
   It is! it is! O words of bliss!—Thou seest it!
   My Constantine lays the proud crescent low!
   Thou lookst upon it truly; and their forms
   Before thee move, e'en as the very forms
   Of living men?

Con.
                        Even so.

Val.
                                            O blessed sight!
   It is not witch'ry's spell, but holy spirits
   Sent from a gracious heav'n that shapes such forms;
   And be it lawless or unhallow'd deem'd,
   Here will I kneel in humble gratitude.

Con.

 preventing her from kneeling .
   No, no, this must not be: attend again:
   There's more behind.

Val.
   Ha! sayst thou more behind? Or good or evil?

Con.
   Mixed I ween: 'tis still in darkness lapp'd.

Val.
   In darkness let it rest: I've heard enough,
   I would not look upon thine eyes again,
   And in my fancy shape thy unseen sights,
   For all that e'er—Is that which lies behind
   A far extended vision?

 Pausing anxiously.
   Thou wilt not answer me—well, rest it so.
   But yet, O forward look for one short year,
   And say who then shall be this city's lord.

Con.
   Thy husband and thy lord, most might dame,
   Shall at that period be this city's lord.

Val.
   Then I am satisfied. Thou hast my thanks,
   My very grateful thanks. There is thy recompense,
   And this too added.

 Giving him a purse, and then a ring from her hand.
                                            We shall meet again
   In happier days, when the proud crescent's low,
   And thou shalt have a princely recompense.

 Turning to her attendants as she goes away.
   Come, Lucia; come, my friends; the storm will pass,
   And we shall smile in the fair light of heaven
   In happier days.


 Exit, followed by her attendants.
Con.

 looking at his reward .
   Good sooth, this almost smites against my heart;
   But goes she not far happier than she came?
   Have I not earn'd it well?


Re-enter Petronius .
Pet.
                                            Thou hast well earn'd it.
   What! harbour such poor scruples in a breast
   So exercised in a trade like this?
   Fy on't! But if thy conscience is so nice,
   Know that thou hast in all good likelihood
   Predicted truly; and her lord and husband
   Shall be still, as thou sayst, this city's lord.

Con.
   How so?

Pet.
   Hast thou not skill enough to guess?
   Much has the Sultan of Valeria heard;
   And, with the future beauties of his palace,
   His fancy, in the most distinguish'd rank,
   Already places her. Thou wilt ere long,
   I can foretel by certain fleeting shapes
   Which at this moment dance before mine eyes,
   A favour'd, famous, courtly prophet be.
   My little Ella too, taught by my art,
   May play, perhaps, her part; and so together
   We'll amicably work.—May it not be?
   Put up thy gold and say it is well earn'd.

Con.
   It must be had, and therefore must be earn'd,
   Falsely or honestly.—Does Constantine,


 
   As speaks this morning's rumour, send again
   Another embassy to Mahomet
   With terms of peace?

Pet.
   He does, my friend: already in the palace
   He, and his band of self-devoted fools,
   Deliberate on it. Thou, at no great risk,
   Mayst prophecy the issue of their counsels.

Con.
   I have adventured upon bolder guessing.

Pet.
   Excepting that slight aid from Genoa,
   Which by the master of a coasting vessel.
   Kept secretly on watch, I am inform'd
   Is now almost within sight of the coast,
   No hope remains to Constantine. And this
   Shall not deceive him long; for I've despatch'd,
   In a swift-sailing skiff, a trusty agent,
   Who shall with costly bribes and false reports
   Deter their boldness from all desp'rate efforts
   To force a passage to the block'd-up port:
   A thing, Rodrigo's bold success alone
   Hath taught us to believe e'en possible.

Con.
   Thanks for your information, my good lord:
   I'll profit by it.

Pet.
   But use it prudently. And so good day.
   Well thrive thy trade, and all good luck attend us.


 Exeunt severally.
SCENE IV.
An apartment in the imperial palace, with a view through a grand arched door of another apartment, in which are discovered Constantine, Othus, Justiniani, Rodrigo , and others, arising from a council table. They enter and come forward.
Con.
   Well, my brave friends, I to your care intrust
   This last attempt by honourable treaty
   To gain peace from the foe. Heav'n bless your efforts!

Jus.
   All that strict honour will permit to us
   Shall be most truly done, imperial lord,
   And one step farther on we cannot go.

Con.
   Had I wish'd more than this, Justiniani,
   I had sent other ministers.—
   Heav'n bless your efforts, brave ambassadors,
   And make you wise as brave!
                                            If we succeed not,
   As much I fear, it is my earnest wish,
   Ere the grand push that shall our fate decide,
   To meet you all in blessed charity,
   And join with you, perhaps, in the last rites
   Of Christian worship that within our walls
   Shall e'er be celebrated.

Othus.
   Your wish shall be fulfill'd: we all desire it.

Con.
   I thank you. In an hour hence be prepared
   To set out for the Sultan's camp. So brothers,
   Good day, and all good favour!


 Exeunt all but Constantine and Othus .
Con.

 to Othus , as he is about to go after the others .
   Wilt thou go also, Othus?

Othus.
   Not if your highness does command my stay.

Con.
   Ah, gentle friend! I do no more command!
   But this distresses thee. Well, gen'rous man,
   Thou art commanded.

 Pointing to a seat, and they both sit.
                                            Here, by thy friendly side,
   I'll give my heart a little breathing space;
   For oh! the gen'rous love of these brave men,
   Holding thus nobly to my sinking fate,
   Presses it sorely.
   From thee nor from myself can I conceal
   The hopeless state in which I am beset.
   No foreign prince a brother's hand extends
   In this my hour of need; no Christian state
   Sends forth its zealous armies to defend
   This our begirded cross: within our walls,
   Though with th' addition of our later friends,
   I cannot number soldiers e'en sufficient
   To hold a petty town 'gainst such vast odds.
   I needs must smile and wear a brow of hope,
   But with thee, gentle Othus, I put off
   All form and seeming; I am what I am,
   A weak and heart-rent man.—Wilt thou forgive me?
   For I in truth must weep.

Othus.
   Yes, unrestrained weep, thou valiant soul
   With many a wave o'er-ridden! Thou striv'st nobly
   Where hearts of sterner stuff perhaps had sunk:
   And o'er thy fall, if it be so decreed,
   Good men will mourn, and brave men will shed tears,
   Kindred to those which now thou shedst. Thy name
   Shall in succeeding ages be remember'd,
   When those of mighty monarchs are forgot.

Con.
   Deceive me not; thy love deceiveth thee.
   Men's actions to futurity appear
   But as th' events to which they are conjoin'd
   Do give them consequence. A fallen state,
   In age and weakness fall'n, no hero hath;
   For none remain behind unto whose pride
   The cherish'd mem'ry of his acts pertains.
   O no, good Othus, fame I look not for.
   But to sustain in heav'n's all-seeing eye,
   Before my fellow men, in mine own sight,
   With graceful virtue and becoming pride,
   The dignity and honour of a man,
   Thus station'd as I am, I will do all
   That man may do, and I will suffer all—
   My heart within me cries, that man can suffer.

 Starting up with vehemence, and holding up both hands firmly clenched.
   Shall low-born men on scaffolds firmly tread,
   For that their humble townsmen should not blush
   And shall I shrink? No, by the living God!
   I will not shrink, albeit I shed these tears.



 
Othus.
   To be in toils and perils, any in sufferings,
   With th' applauding sympathy of men
   Upon his side, is to the noble mind
   A state of happiness beyond the bliss
   Of calm inglorious ease.

Con.
   O no, good Othus! thou misjudgest of me.
   I would, God knows, in a poor woodman's hut
   Have spent my peaceful days, and shared my crust
   With her who would have cheer'd me, rather far
   Than on this throne; but, being what I am,
   I'll be it nobly.

Othus.
   Yes, thou wilt be it nobly, spirit as brave
   As e'er wore Cæsar's name!

Con.

 smiling sorrowfully .
   Yes, there is cause for me; there is good cause.
   But for those valiant men, link'd in my fate,
   Who have in other lands their peaceful homes
   And dear domestic ties, on whom no claim
   Lays its strong hold—alas! what cause have they?
   What is their recompense? Fame is not mine;
   And unto them—O this doth press my heart!
   A heart surcharged with many cares, and press'd
   With that besides, which more than all—with that
   Which I have wrestled with—which I have striv'n—
   With that which comes between me and myself—
   The self that as a Christian and a man
   I strongly strove to be—

Othus.
   You have before some secret cause of trouble
   Hinted in broken words: will not your highness
   Unto a faithful friend—

Con.

 turning away from him .
                                            No, no, good Othus!
   Sometimes I dream like a distracted man,
   And nurse dark fancies. Power and lawless will—
   Defenceless beauty—Mahomet—Valeria—
   Shape out of these wild words whate'er thou wilt,
   For I can say no more.

Othus.
   Alas, I know it all!

Con.
   And yet why should it thus disturb my mind?
   A thought, perhaps, that in no other breast
   Hath any shelter found.—It is my weakness:
   I am ashamed of it.—I can look
   On my short fated span and its dark bound:
   I can, God strength'ning me, my earthly task
   Close as becomes a king; and, being closed,
   To that which in this world's tumultuous stage
   Shall happen after it, I am as nothing.

Othus.
   Alas! my royal master, do not thus
   To racking thoughts give way! are there not means
   To free you from this pain, if you to use them
   Have courage? Let the empress be convey'd
   Far from these walls. It is a cruel remedy,
   But it will give you peace.

Con.
   I did attempt it, but she has so closely
   Entwined herself upon me—O, my friend,
   It needs must pass! I in th'unconscious grave
   Shall be at rest.

Othus.
   But does she know the nature of your fears?

Con.
   O no! she does not! from that hateful subject,
   As from a hideous serpent, still with her
   I've kept aloof.—Alas! what can I do?
   I could as well into her noble heart
   Thrust the barb'd dart, as tell her what I fear.

Othus.
   Perhaps she still, as from the common horrors
   Of a sack'd town, may be conjured to flee.
   And here she comes: be it at least attempted.


Enter Valeria, Lucia , and attendant Ladies.
Val.

 to Constantine .
   I come to claim thy promise: one short hour,
   A hasty sunbeam through the cloud's dark skirt,
   Thou giv'st to me, and I must claim my right.
   Thy friends, too, ere they go, shall be my guests;
   I have brought powerful suitors to assist me.

 Pointing to her ladies.
   Ha! what disturbs thee? how is this, my love?
   Thy face is changed and troubled—What new cause—

Con.
   O, no new cause! one that has much disturb'd me.

Val.
   And one to me unknown?

Con.
   Speak to her, Othus!

Othus.
   By many various ills and cares oppress'd,
   Your royal lord is still most closely touch'd
   With that which does your weal regard. What fate
   May, in a storm-ta'en city, of dire sights
   And horrid cruelties, have in reserve,
   If such the city's doom, who can foresee?
   O, let him then his painful station hold,
   Gen'rous Valeria! from one care relieved,
   His heaviest care, the thought of leaving thee
   The involved witness of such horrid things!

Val.
   What wouldst thou say in this? Thinkst thou the ruin
   In which he perishes will have for me
   Or form or circumstances? It will be
   Th' upbreaking crash of all existing things,
   That undistinguish'd is, and felt but once.
   Othus, thou talkst like an unskilful sage:
   It was not thus thy master bade thee speak.

Con.
   Valeria, hard necessity compels us.
   I have already safe asylum sought
   For the last tender remnant of our race,
   That something might from this dire wreck be saved,
   And shall I not for thee—

Val.
                                            No; I am nothing
   But what I am for thee! When that is finish'd—

Con.
   Ah, my Valeria, but that will not finish!
   Thou still mayst be for me—thou still mayst bear
   Honour'd memorial amongst living men
   Of him who was thy lord.—Good Lucia, aid me,


 
   And gentle Servia, too, and all of you!

 To the ladies.
   Cling round your mistress with your soothing love,
   And say that in a foreign land you'll be
   The faithful friends and soothers of her woe,
   Where ev'ry virtuous heart will bear to her
   The kindred ties of holiest sympathy.
   Say ye will be with her in kindliest zeal:
   Ye will not leave her?

Lucia and the other ladies.
   No, we'll never leave her!

 Gathering round her affectionately.
   Most dear and royal mistress, whilst life holds,
   In whate'er land, in whate'er state you are,
   We'll never leave you.

Val.
   I know it well: thanks to your gen'rous love!
   But yet forbear, nor thus beset me round!

 Putting them gently from her, and fixing her eyes upon Constantine .
   O, Paleologus! hast thou for me
   In fancy shaped a world and an existence
   Where thou art not?

 Running to him and falling on his neck.
   Here is my world, my life, my land of refuge,
   And to no other will I ever flee.
   Here still is light and hope; turning from this,
   All else is round me as a yawning tomb.

Con.
   My dearest love! my gen'rous honour'd love!
   My sweet Valeria! thou distractest me;
   But have thy way, for I can urge no more.
   Let dark fate come: I will abide its worst.

Val.
   Nay, say not dark; there is a hope within me;
   'Tis sure, 'tis strong, it cannot be deceitful.

 A signal heard from without.
   Hark! Hark! a signal!

 Voices are heard calling without. 
   Ships are in sight! supplies and warlike aid!
   Heaven sends us aid!

Val.

 holding up her hands .
   O blessed sound! there is salvation in it.
   Heaven sends us aid!

 Voices again call out as before, and the signal is repeated.
   Again the blessed sound!
   And here Rodrigo comes, wearing a face
   Of welcome tidings.
Enter Rodrigo .

   Succours, brave Rodrigo?

Rod.
   Yes, ships from Genoa are now in sight,
   Bearing, no doubt, brave aid, if to the port
   They can make good their entrance.

 All, except Constantine .
   Good heaven be bless'd.

Con.
   And says Rodrigo “if?”


 Shaking his head.
Val.
   Nay, fear not, they will enter; with them comes
   Another brave Rodrigo; through barr'd adamant,
   Did it oppose them, they will force their way.

Rod.
   If they have but one jot of manhood in them,
   They'll do all possible things.

Val.
   Ay, and all things are possible!

Con.
   In truth, thou talkst with such exulting confidence,
   Thou almost temptest me to grasp at hope.


 Voices call out as before, and a signal from the towers.
Val.
   The animating sound! Come, come! O, come!
   And o'er the blue waves hail the blessed sight!


 Runs out exultingly, every one following her with animated alacrity.
ACT III. SCENE I.
The Turkish camp; the tent of Mahomet , who is discovered sitting alone in the eastern manner, with a great sheet of parchment spread out before him, which he is considering attentively.
Mah.

 after tracing some lines with a pen or pencil .
   Ho, Osmir! art thou here?
Enter Osmir .

   Come hither, vizir; follow with thine eye
   The various dispositions of this plan
   Which for our grand attack I here have traced.
   God and the Prophet being on our side,
   That mingled broil of fierce and dreadful fight,
   Which shall not cease till from the list of nations
   This eastern empire, with its long told line
   Of paltry Cæsars, be expunged and blank,
   Shall not be long delay'd.

Osmir.
   All things must yield unto the towering spirit
   And comprehensive genius of your highness.
   Permit your slave.

 Looking over the plan.
   Conceived, indeed, with deep and wondrous skill!
   But, mighty lord, if that a worm may speak,
   Your van, methinks, is of a motley class,
   The vile refuse and garbage of the camp;
   Are Mussulmen led on in glory's path
   By such as these?

Mah.

 smiling fiercely .
   No; but brave Mussulmen o'er such as these
   May step to glory's path. Garbage, I trust,
   Is good enough for filling ditches up.
   Some thousand carcases, living and dead,
   Of those who first shall glut the en'my's rage,
   Push'd in, pell-mell, by those who press behind,
   Will rear for us a bridge to mount the breach
   Where ablest engineers had work'd in vain.



 
Osmir.
   This did escape my more contracted thoughts.
   And here your highness stations Georgian troops:
   Are they sure men in such important service?

Mah.

 smiling again .
   Ay, sure as death; here is my surety for them.
   Seest thou what warriors in the rear are placed,
   With each a cord and hatchet in his hand?
   Those grizly hangmen, in their canvas sleeves,
   Fight for me better than an armed band
   Of Christian knights full cap-à-pie. Look o'er it:
   Something, perchance, may have escaped my thoughts.

Osmir

 after again examining it .
   No; every thing is consummately plann'd.—
   But, mighty sultan, this old officer,
   Whom you have station'd here with your new troops,
   Is not to be relied on.

Mah.
                                            How so, Osmir?

Osmir.
   It is suspected that he has received
   The en'my's gold; one thing, at least, is certain,
   He has had private meetings with the foe.

Mah.
   What! art thou sure of this?—Send for him quickly.
   The fool 'mid blocks and bowstrings has so long
   His base head tott'ring worn, he thinks, no doubt,
   It needs must be his own. Send for him quickly,
   And see that which is needful done upon him.

 Drawing the pen sternly across the name on the plan.
   There; from the world of living things I blot him;
   Another takes his place.
 Giving a paper to Osmir. 

                                            These are the usual orders for the night;
   Assemble thou the sev'ral officers,
   And give to each his own particular charge.

Osmir.
   Your slave obeys.


 Exit.
Mah.

 alone, after musing for a little while .
   Have I done well to give this hoary vet'ran
   Who has for thirty years fought in our wars,
   To the death-cord unheard?

 Sternly, after pausing a short space.
                                            I have done well.
   In my disguised rounds, but two nights since,
   List'ning at his tent-door, I heard him speak
   Words that methought approach'd to slight esteem
   Of my endowments and capacity.
   Yes, he is guilty.

 After walking up and down several times he opens another scroll.
   But I will fear no treason: here is that
   On which I may rely. In mortal man
   I have no trust; they are all hollow slaves,
   Who tremble and detest, and would betray.
   But on the fates, and the dark secret powers,
   So say those sure unerring calculations
   Of deep astrology, I may depend.

 Sitting down again, and considering the scroll.
   Ay, it must needs be so: this constellation
   In close conjunction with the warrior's star,
   Traced back in magic numbers three times three,
   And nine times nine, and added three again,
   Unto the hour of my nativity,
   Makes it infallible. Here have I mark'd it
   With my own science, num'ral, learn'd, and sure.
   Ha! ha! your foolish Christians now believe
   Men's future fortunes are by wizards seen,
   In airy forms pourtray'd, like mimic shows,
   And trust thereto with fond simplicity.

 Othoric , who about the middle of this speech has made his appearance from behind the curtain of the tent, disguised like a Turk, but without a turban, now, stealing alose up to Maiiomet , lifts up his dagger to strike.
   What do I hear?

Othoric.
   It is thy fate, blind Turk, uncalculated.


 Striking.
Mah.

 parrying the blow with his sheathed scimitar, which he afterwands draws .
   Ho! help without! treason and parricide!
   Ho! guards without, I say!


 Guards rush in, and Othoric is seized, after defending himself desperately.
Mah.

 to Othoric .
   Who art thou? What dark tyrant set thee on
   To do this murderous and horrid deed?

Othoric.
   And thinkst thou such deeds horrid?—But I came
   To act and not to speak.

Mah.
   Say rather, villain, to be acted on.
   Do racks and burning iron please thee well
   That thou shouldst earn them with such desperate pains.

 To the Guards. 
   Stretch out his arms, and let me look on them.

 Looking at his arms, and surveying him all over, he shrinks back as from a danger escaped, and then smiles grimly.
   There will be tough work on those sinewy limbs
   When they are dealt with. Lead the traitor off.
   I will give orders for his fate ere long.

 To Othoric , who is about to speak.
   Thou shalt not speak: I hate thy horrible face.
   Lead him away!


 Exeunt Othoric and Guards, met by Petronius and Marthon , who enter as they are going out.
Pet.
   What prisoner is this they lead along?

Mah.
   A dark assassin in my tent conceal'd,
   Whose daring hand e'en now aim'd at my life.

Pet.

 casting up his eyes to heaven .
   The life of great and godlike Mahomet!
   It makes my blood turn cold.

Mar.
   I too am stunn'd, and tremble at the thought.

Mah.
   Yes, all may tremble who in the dark purpose
   Have part or knowledge had.



 
Pet. and Mar.

 both alarmed .
   What means my lord?


 Mahomet walks several times across the stage with angry strides, whilst they look fearfully upon one another, and then going sternly up to them.
Mah.
   I know the base transactions of last night:
   Ye stuff'd my gold into the dirty palms
   Of those who shook their torches in the air,
   And cried long live brave Paleologus.
   I know it all: think ye with upcast looks,
   And mumm'ry such as this, to blind mine eyes?

Pet.

 falling on his knees .
   As there's a God in heav'n, to you, great Sultan!
   We have been true!


 Marthon kneels also.
Mah.
   Up, crouching slaves! when men, so bred as you are,
   Thus lowly kneel, my very soul abhors them.

Pet.
   Your death, great monarch, were to Paleologus
   Triumph and safety, but to us swift ruin.

Mar.
   And shall suspicions so improbable
   Fall upon us, who in your secret service
   Have dangers braved, and from your hands alone
   Look for the recompense?

Pet.
   If we last night have fail'd—

Mah.

 stamping with his foot .
                                            I will not hear you!
Enter Osmir.

   Osmir, knowst thou this horrible attempt?

Osmir.
   I do, great prince, and bless the prophet's arm
   That has preserved you. What base enemy
   Has arm'd the desp'rate villain?

Mah.
   Petronius here and his smooth Grecian friend
   Throw accusation on the emperor.

Osmir.
   This moment in your camp there is arrived
   An embassage of his most honour'd friends,
   Sent by the emperor to treat of peace.

Mah.
   At this unlikely hour?

Osmir.
   Yes, time now presses, and, as I should guess,
   The hopes of succour from those friendly vessels
   That vainly have attempted through your fleets
   To force a passage, raising short-lived joy
   Full soon extinguish'd, has to this late hour
   Delay'd their coming.
   Hope gone, they now are humbled suitors. Here,
   Within your power, you have the chiefest men
   Of the brave friends on whom he most depends;
   This does not look like preconcerted plots
   Of secret murder, at this very hour
   To be attempted

Mah.
   No, Osmir, there is reason in thy words.

Osmir.
   But if your highness thinks it is expedient,
   I will straightway arrest them.

Mah.

 after hesitating .
   No; they are valiant men, and do as such
   Claim honour from a valiant foe. Go say,
   That by the morning's dawn they shall have audience;
   The open camp, with wide-mouth'd cannon cloth'd,
   And all my lofty garniture of war,
   Shall be my hall of state. Secure those men
   Until my farther orders!


 Pointing to Petronius and Marthon , and exit, followed by Osmir. Remain Petronius and Marthon guarded.
 st guard.
   Come on, my masters, we'll conduct you safely.

Mar.

 to Petronius .
   Is it to plunge me in this dreadful gulf
   That your cursed lessons have seduced my youth?

Pet.
   Upbraid me not. I have not for myself
   A better fate reserved. But we are noble,
   And of high lineage; fear not, for the Sultan
   Will still respect us.

 d guard.
   Ay, so belike he will; your noble heads
   May with the royal scimitar be sever'd,
   If he is much inclined to honour you.
   Some men ere now, in other Sultans' days,
   Have been so honour'd.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
An open space in the camp, with the Janizaries and Turkish troops drawn up in order. Cannon and warlike engines seen mixed with the tents. A flourish of trumpets; enter Mahomet , with Osmir and his train, and places himself in a chair of state near the front of the stage. Another flourish of trumpets, and enter Othus, Justiniani , and Rodrigo , with a small train of attendants, walking slowly up the stage.
Mah.

 to Osmir , as they come forward .
   These men approach us with a hardy step,
   Nor wear the suppliant's humbled brow. Come they
   To sue or to command us?

 To Othus and the other deputies, who make obeisance to him.
   You are permitted to declare your errand.
   If your hard-lesson'd chief, more prudent grown,
   Will now resign his proud imperial city
   Into the hands to whom high heaven's decree,
   And power on earth resistless, soon shall give it,
   I will receive that which he cannot hold
   With grace and favour.

Othus.
   High heaven's decrees are known to mortal man
   But in th' event fulfill'd; and for earth's power,
   The cannon-flanked cohorts, and wide front
   Of far extended numbers, show it not


 
   To him, who in the small and secret fortress,
   E'en of one brave man's breast, more help discovers,
   Oft in th' astounding hour of the storm's pitch,
   Than in an armed host. Imperial Constantine
   Will live or die within his city's walls
   As may become their master.—Nevertheless,
   He will so far to hard necessity—

Mah.
   I hear no more: your words are in effectual,
   And fall as powerless as the ruffian's sword,
   Whom now, within my tent, your royal master,
   Compell'd no doubt by hard necessity,
   Has hired to murder me.

Just.

 stepping boldly forward .
   Sultan, thou sittest where thou safely mayst
   Say what thou wilt, therefore of all mankind
   Thou most art bound to say but what is meet.
   Put those accusing words that thou hast utter'd
   Into the mouth of any other Turk,
   Wore he a giant's form, for in your camp
   I know that such there be, and I will prove it,
   With this good soldier's arm, a cursed falsehood.

Othus

 to Justiniani , pulling him back .
   Thou art not wise.—Great Sultan, hear me speak.
   If any base attack upon your life
   Has been attempted, let the murd'rous villain,
   If still he breathes, be here before us brought.
   In presence of your highness we will question him:
   Perchance he will confess what secret foe
   Has armed his daring hand.

Mah.

 after giving orders to a guard in dumb show, who immediately goes out .
                                            Your suit is granted.
   These men speak boldly, vizir.


 Aside to Osmir.
Osmir

 aside to Mahomet .
   They shrink not from the proof.


Enter Othoric fettered and guarded.
Mah.

 to Othoric .
   As thou mayst hope a mitigated doom,
   I here command thee that thou truly answer
   Whate'er those Roman deputies demand.

Othoric.
   I do not hope a mitigated doom,
   And therefore, Sultan, cannot be commanded:
   But if this brave man here will question me,

 Pointing to Rodrigo.
   For in his presence I do feel my spirit
   To manhood's height braced up, I'll truly answer,
   Though every word did in my sinews fix
   The burning pincer's tooth.

Rod.
   Ha! Othoric art thou not? the strong Hungarian?

Othoric

 smiling .
   Ay, thou rememberest my name—I thank thee—
   It pleases me to think thou'lt ne'er forget it.
   Ask what thou wilt, and I will answer thee;
   Bid me do what thou wilt, and I will do it,
   Barring the hind'rance of these chains.

Rod.
                                            Thanks to thee!
   Then whatsoe'er the Sultan asks of thee,
   Answer him truly. He will point his questions
   Where his suspicion falls.

Othoric.
                                            I will obey.

Mah.

 sternly .
   Who hired thee, thou bold and hard-brow'd villain,
   Such horrid deed to do?

Othoric.
   I have been twice hired, mighty Mahomet,
   To do fell deeds, in which I've lack'd performance.

Mah.
   And who first hired thee?

Othoric.
                        Thyself.

Mah.
                                            Base traitor!
   Dar'st thou belie me to my very face?

Othoric.
   That I belie thee not be this my token;
   My hire was given to me by Petronius,
   Told from a sable bag, on whose seal'd mouth
   Thy scimitar and crescent were impress'd.

Othus.
   Petronius!

Othoric.
                                            Yes, that smooth, subtle Greek.

Mah.
   He hired thee not to take the life of Constantine?

Othoric.
   True; I was hired for wasteful insurrection,
   Not for delib'rate murder. Though most wretched,
   A stranger, griped by hard necessity,
   The price he gave me ne'er had bought this arm
   To such an act.

Mah.
   And who did hire thee for this second deed,
   Which thou must needs delib'rate murder call?

Othoric.
   'Twas Constantine.

Just.
                                            Thou liest, foul, artful villain!

Mah.
   Peace I command! ye shall not interrupt him.
   'Twas Constantine that hired thee?

Othoric.
                                            Yes, great Sultan!
   But not with gold, and he himself, I ween,
   Unconscious of the act.

Mah.
                                            What did he bribe thee with?

Othoric.
   With that which does but seldom prove the means
   Of like corruption—gen'rous admiration
   Of noble manly virtue. I beheld him,
   Like a brave stag encompass'd by base curs,
   And it did tempt me.—Other bribe than this
   Have I had none; and to no mortal ear
   Did I reveal my purpose.


 Mahomet puts his hand on his forehead and seems disturbed, whilst the deputies hold up their hands exultingly.
Rod.

 to Othoric .
   O for a galley mann'd with such as thou art,
   Therewith to face a hundred armed ships,
   Creatured with meaner life!
   Yet thou must die, brave heart! yet thou must die.
   Thou hast done that which in no circumstance
   Man's hand may do, and therefore thou must perish.
   But I'll remember thee: thy name is Othoric:
   I will remember thee.



 
Osmir

 to Mahomet , who covers his face and seems disturbed, after a pause .
   Your highness gives no orders to your slave
   Touching the prisoner.

Mah.

 uncovering his face angrily .
   His crime is plain: death be his instant doom.

Osmir.
   And in what mode? or simple or with pains?

Mah.
   Distract me not.

Othoric.
                                            Vizir, be not so hasty.
   I bear with me what will redeem my life,
   And gain the Sultan's pardon.

Osmir.
   Ah! thinkest thou to gain him with that bribe
   Which Constantine gave thee?


 Shaking his head.
Othoric.
   No, not with that. I wear upon this arm,
   A potent band, with subtile magic wrought,
   That, wheresoe'er 'tis on my body rubb'd
   With mutter'd words which I alone do know,
   Maketh the part firm and invulnerable
   To sword, or bullet, or the arrow's point—
   To all offensive things. Believe me not,
   But see the proof.—Relieve mine arms, I pray,
   That I may show this wonder.

Mah.
   Unlock his fetters: if he tamper with us,
   His tortures are enhanced.

Othoric

 to the guard who stands next him, after he has been unfettered, and at the same time uncovering his left arm .
   Young Turk, thou wearst a dagger by thy side:
   To show that I am made as other men,
   Of flesh and blood as soft and sensitive,
   When with no charm secured, thrust it, I pray thee,
   Into this nerved flesh. Nay, do not shrink,
   For I shrink not.

Mah.
                                            Do it, thou timid slave!


 The guard slightly wounds Othoric 's arm with the point of the dagger.
Othoric.
   You see it is an arm of flesh and blood;
   And so you'll find my body in all parts,
   Thrust where you will.—But mark me; wheresoe'er
   I rub this band, your weapons have no power.

 Opening his breast and rubbing it with a bracelet which he takes from his arm, at the same time muttering some mystical words to himself.
   Now try if e'er the stoutest arm amongst you,
   With pike, or spear, or keenly-temper'd blade,
   Can pierce this charmed breast.

Mah.

 to an attendant .
   Attempt it, brawny slave; thine arm is strong.

 To Osmir. 
   Give him a stronger weapon.—Now the proof!


 The slave, receiving a sword from Osmir , runs with full force upon Othoric , who falls down, pierced through the breast, and utters a convulsive laugh as he expires.
Rod.

 exultingly .
   O, bravely done, thou spirit of true proof!

Just.
   Yes, nobly has he shunn'd the degradation
   Of slavish punishment.

Othus.
   It was a lofty mind in a rude state
   Of wild distorted virtue; 'cross the fancy
   It stalks a gloomy, dark, gigantic shade,
   Angel or fiend we know not.

Mah.

 aside to himself, turning gloomily away .
   And Constantine is served by men like these!

Othus

 to Mahomet .
   Seeing that of this crime our royal master
   Doth clearly stand acquitted, by your word,
   Most mighty Mahomet, we are permitted
   To state his wishes.

Mah.
                                            No, ambassadors;
   I have already said I hear no more
   Unless ye yield the city.—Leave ye have
   In safety to return.—You and your chief
   O'er a volcano's thinly-bridged gulf
   Have ta'en your stand, and the dire crash is near.

Othus.
   And with our chief in that tremendous ruin,
   If it must be, we will sink lovingly.

Just.
   We will sink honourably.

Rod.
   We will sink gloriously. Ay, by heaven's light,
   And cheerly too, great Sultan!

 Passing the body of Othoric as they turn to go away.
   Thou noble wreck, thou wast rigg'd gallantly!


 Exeunt Othus, Justiniani, Rodrigo , and their attendants.
Mah.

 coming forward to the front of the stage, and standing for some time in a thoughtful posture much disturbed .
   And Constantine is served by men like these!

Osmir

 to slaves, pointing to the body of Othoric .
   Take up the carcase of that savage ruffian,
   And stick it on a stake for vulture's food.

Mah.

 turning round angrily .
   No, reptiles, let it have a soldier's grave!

Osmir.
   This is exceeding mercy; ne'ertheless,
   Your orders, mighty prince, shall be obey'd
   By those who are as dust beneath your feet.

Mah.
   Yes, I do know that I shall be obey'd
   By those who are—I am begirt with slaves.

 Turning away, and stamping on the ground as he walks.
   My enemy is served by men like these!
   I will give orders with all pressing speed
   That now my grand attack forthwith be made:
   What next may be attempted by such foes
   Who may divine?

Osmir.
   That is the safest counsel.


 Exeunt ; Mahomet tossing his arms and muttering us he goes out.


 
ACT IV. SCENE I.
An outpost belonging to the Turkish camp, with a view of the city of Constantinople in the background seen in the dimness of cloudy moonlight. Enter several Turkish soldiers by different ways, meeting one another.
 st Turk.
   Ho! who are ye? our friends?

 d Turk.
   I know thy voice.

 st Turk.
   Yes, we are friends; but let us separate,
   And gain our tents as quickly as we may:
   For now through all the camp the busy stir
   Of warlike preparation is begun;
   And ere the morning dawn, each armed Turk
   Must hold him ready for th' approaching day
   Of havock, blood, and spoil. Come, let us on!

 d Turk.
   Yes; but, good comrades, do once more look back,
   And see, through the wan night, those buildings gleam
   With the last Christian fires that e'er shall burn
   Within those circling walls.

 d Turk.
   Ay, there the Prophet has prepared our rest.
   There soon, midst heap'd-up spoils, and the wild wailings
   Of fetter'd beauty, in our new-won homes,
   We'll cast our reeking scimitars aside,
   And lay us down in soft and lordly sloth.
   Comrades, it is an animating sight.
   But quickly let us gain our tents.—Hush! hush!
   What Turk comes prowling this way, and alone?
   It looks like Mahomet.

 st Turk.
   It is the Sultan on his nightly rounds,
   Disguised; let us avoid him.

 d Turk.
   I'd rather cross a tiger on my way;
   For, as the humour hits, it may be fatal
   To know or not to know him. At the best
   We shall be deem'd but lawless stragglers here:
   Let us all separate and gain our tents.


 Exeunt hastily, all by different ways.

Enter Mahomet disguised, followed at a distance by the Vizir.
Mah.

 alone, after walking thoughtfully from the bottom of the stage, whilst Osmir remains in the background .
   What boots this restless wish? 'tis all blank silence
   On that for which my greedy ears still watch.
   There's ne'er a Turk, who, o'er his ev'ning pipe,
   Will not far rather talk of daring feats
   By petty robbers done, than all the fame
   And grand achievements of his sov'reign lord.
   'Tis cheerless silence all! Dull stupid race!
   They arm them for to-morrrow's fight, 'tis true,
   With much alacrity, and talk of conquest,
   Carnage, and spoils; but for their Sultan's name,
   The name of Mahomet, through all the camp
   I've scarcely heard its sound. Nay, once I heard it
   In accents harsh pronounced, but as to listen
   I nearer drew, my steps the speaker scared,
   And all was into fearful silence hush'd.
   Their Sultan's name!—Pest seize the stupid slaves!
   O, Constantine! it is not thus thy soldiers
   Do arm themselves for thee.
   Ho, Osmir! art thou near me?

Osmir

 advancing .
   Yes, my lord.

Mah.
                                            Hast thou been list'ning too?

Osmir.
   Yes, Sultan; and I find your Mussulmen
   Their arms preparing for to-morrow's battle,
   Beneath your royal standard most determin'd
   To conquer or to die.
   They under your approving eye will fight,
   As in the sunshine of propitious heaven.

Mah.
   Yes, I am in their minds full truly grown
   A thing of gen'ral attributes composed—
   A heaven of sunshine or of lowering storms:
   But as a man and leader, in whom live
   The mental and corporeal qualities
   Of Mahomet—Pest seize the stupid slaves!
Enter Petronius and Marthon muffled up in cloaks.

   But who comes here? twice on my rounds already
   Those men have cross'd me: am I known to them?
   By the great Prophet they shall bear their secret
   Where secrets are secure!—Ho! stop slaves there!
   Stop, in the Sultan's name!


 Running upon them furiously, and lifting his scimitar over the head of Petronius , who immediately discovers himself.
Pet.
                                            Crush not a worm, my lord.

Mah.
   A worm indeed! What treason brings ye here,
   Skulking, thus muffled up in dark disguise?
   Have I not warn'd ye both that ye do live
   Beneath mine iron power in strictest faultlessness?
   For that when ye are found but to transgress
   The galling limits of imposed duty
   Even a hair's breadth, there abideth you
   A recompense more dreadful than torn slaves,
   Writhing in horrid ecstasy, e'er knew.
   Beware: ye have no power to serve me now,
   And unsuccessful traitors are most hateful.

Pet.
   It is, great Mahomet, to make amends
   For unsuccessful services, that here
   Thou findst us, on our way within the city
   To gain for thee some useful information
   Against to-morrow's push. Still in our power
   Some little aid remains.

Mah.
   If thou sayst true, return to me again,
   Leading thy beauteous daughter in thy hand,
   Ere two hours pass, who shall within my tent
   A pledge remain for thy suspicious faith


 
   Until the city's ta'en.—Begone, I charge you,
   And answer not again.

 Exeunt Petronius and Marthon.
   Are all my orders issued for the morrow?
   To each respective officer assign'd
   His task and station? and my rearward troops,
   My axe and cord-men, they are not forgotten?

Osmir.
   No, please your highness, nothing is forgotten.
   And by the early dawn—


 A mixture of confused distant sounds heard from the city.
Mah.
                                            What sounds are these?

Osmir.
   Hast thou forgot we are so near the city?
   It is the murm'ring night sounds of her streets,
   Which the soft breeze wafts to thine ear, thus softly
   Mix'd with the chafings of the distant waves.

Mah.

 eagerly .
   And let me listen too! I love the sound!
   Like the last whispers of a dying enemy

 Listening.
   It comes to my pleased ear.
   Spent art thou, proud imperial queen of nations,
   And thy last accents are upon the wind.
   Thou hast but one voice more to utter; one
   Loud, frantic, terrible, and then art thou
   Amongst the nations heard no more. List! list!
   I like it well! the lion hears afar
   Th' approaching prey, and shakes his bristling mane,
   And lashes with his tail his tawny sides,
   And so hear I this city's nightly sound.

Osmir.
   It is indeed a rich and noble conquest
   Which heaven unto its favour'd warrior gives.

Mah.
   Yes, Osmir; I shall wear a conqu'ror's name,
   And other ages shall of Mah'met speak,
   When these dumb slaves are crumbling in the dust.
   But now the night wears on, and with the dawn
   Must the grand work begin.
   Yet one thing still remains; I must remind thee
   That to my gen'ral orders this be added:—
   Silent shall be the march; nor drum, nor trump,
   Nor clash of arms, shall to the watchful foe
   Our near approach betray; silent and soft,
   As the pard's velvet foot on Libya's sands,
   Slow stealing with crouch'd shoulders on her prey.

Osmir.
   I have already given the strictest orders.

Mah.
   Then all is well: go where thy duty calls.
   In the meanwhile I'll snatch an hour of rest,
   And dream, perhaps, that lovely Grecian dames,
   Even with a crowned beauty in their band,
   Are lowly bent to kiss my purple feet.

 A distant bell heard from the city.
   What deep and distant bell is this which sounds
   So solemnly on the still air of night?

Osmir.
   It comes from St. Sophia's lofty dome,
   Where Constantine, with his small band of friends,
   As I have learnt, should at this hour assemble.
   To join together in religious rites
   Of solemn preparation for to-morrow,
   Which they regard as their last day of life,
   And this as their last act of social brotherhood.

Mah.
   Brave men! do they so meet?

 Pausing.
   But it must be.
   Why should it move me? Heaven decrees their doom:
   I act by high commission, though for instruments
   I have but these dumb slaves.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A pillared aisle or open space in the church of St. Sophia, with other parts of the church seen in perspective. The great bell heard. Enter Heugho , met by an inferior priest.
Priest.
   Thou com'st before thy master and his friends:
   How far are they behind?

Heugho.
   Not many paces.


 Bell sounds again.
Priest.
   Wherefore didst thou start?

Heugho.
   It smote mine ear most strange and dolefully.
   Is there soul in its sound which sadly says,
   It is the last bell that shall Christians warn
   To holy rites within these fated walls?
   How many hundred years this sacred pavement
   Has with the tread of Christian feet been worn!
   And now—Heaven's will be done!

Priest.
   So must we say, if that our turn be come.
   We are a wicked and luxurious race,
   And we have pull'd this ruin on our heads.

Heugho.
   But there are those who needs must fall beneath it,
   Whose noble worth deserved a better fate.

Priest.
   Think ye the grand assault will be so soon?

Heugho.
   'Tis so believed: and see where now they come,
   In gen'rous love and brotherhood united,
   Who shall, perhaps, no more see evening's close,
   Or under social roof of living men
   E'er meet again.

Priest.
   Nay, do not weep, good Heugho;
   For in that blessed place they shall be join'd
   Where great and good men meet.—But I must haste
   To give my brethren notice.


 Exit.

Enter Constantine , with Othus, Rodrigo, Justiniani , and others of his friends, who walk with solemn steps and bareheaded towards the front of the stage, the great bell sounding for the last time as they advance. Constantine then stops, and stretching out his arm as if he wished to speak, they all gather respectfully round him.
Con.
   My friends, there greatly presses on my heart
   Somewhat I've much desired to say to you,
   If a full heart will grant me so much voice.



 
Othus.
   Then speak it, royal sire, we all attend
   With ears of love and most profound respect.

Con.
   Thus station'd on a dark and awful verge,
   In company with you, my noble friends,
   I have desired, in this solemn act,
   To make my peace with God. But, on my soul,
   If any unforgiven wrong to man
   Yet rests, how shall I lift my hands to Him
   Who has made all men, and who cares for all,
   As children of one grand and wondrous house,
   Wherein the mightiest monarch of the earth
   Holds but a little nook?
   I have been one, placed on a giddy height
   Of seeming greatness, therefore liable,
   In nature's poor infirmity, to acts
   Of blind and foolish pride. I have been one
   In much real feebleness, upheld, defended,
   By voluntary aid and gen'rous zeal
   Of valiant strangers owing me no service;
   And therefore liable, in the mind's weakness,
   Its saddest weakness, to ungrateful thoughts
   Tinctured with jealousy. If towards you,
   My noble friends, I have contracted guilt,
   I trust—I know—I beg—what shall I say?
   Your gen'rous hearts to all your deeds of love
   Will add a last forgiveness.

Othus.
   O no, most royal Constantine! to us
   And to all men thou'st ever worthy been,
   Noble and gracious; pardon at our hands
   Thou needest none.

Omnes.
                                            O no, thou needest none!
   As we to thee have faithful followers been,
   Thou'st ever been to us a gen'rous lord.

Con.
   Your love would make it so: would that, indeed,
   A voice within me seal'd its fair report!
   Alas! it doth not; therefore now indulge me.
   If there be one amongst you, unto whom,
   With dark forbidding brow, in a stern moment,
   I've given ungen'rous pain; one whose kind service
   I have with foolish and capricious humours
   More irksome made; one whose frank openness
   Of manly love, offer'd to me as man
   In gen'rous confidence, with heartless pride
   I coldly have repell'd; yea, if there be
   One of you all that ever from my presence
   I have with sadden'd heart unkindly sent,
   I here, in meek repentance, of him crave
   A brother's hand, in token of forgiveness.
   And be it in true charity stretch'd forth,
   As to a man of much infirmity,
   Who has with many trials been beset,
   Wounding ofttimes in bitterness of soul
   The love he should have honour'd.
   What! is there none that will to me hold out
   The palm of charity?
   Then I'll embrace you all, and, with eased heart
   Believe myself forgiven.

 Embracing them all as they crowd affectionately to him, and coming last to Rodrigo.
   And thou, my bold Rodrigo, who canst brave
   The tempests when they rage, and onward bear,
   With the opposed strength of towering navies
   Black'ning before thee, com'st thou to my breast
   In soft forgiving love? I know thou dost.

Rod.
   Ay, in that love that would forgive to thee
   The sum of all thy sins, though multiplied
   Ten thousand thousand fold.—
   That would do in thy service—O cursed limit!
   That there should be what to man's sinew'd strength,
   In all the burning zeal of righteous boldness,
   Impossible is.


 Clenching his hands vehemently.
Othus

 to Rodrigo .
   Cease! dost thou not respect these holy walls?

Rod.
   I do respect them, Othus; ne'er a head,
   Shorn to the scalp, doth bow itself more humbly
   Before heaven's throne than mine, albeit in truth
   My words unseemly are.

Con.
   Come to my heart, my friend! He reigns above
   Who will forgive us both.

 Embraces Rodrigo , and then observing Heugho , who has stood behind, not presuming to approach him with the rest.
   But there is one who stands from me aloof
   With modest backwardness, unto whose charity
   I must be debtor also. Worthy Heugho,
   Since earliest youth I from thy friendly hand
   Have daily kindly offices received,
   Proffer'd with love, exceeding far all duty
   Belonging to thy state; yet, ne'ertheless,
   I once, in a most vile and fretful mood,
   Vex'd with cross things, thine honour'd age forgot.

Heugho.
   Oh, say not so, my dear and royal master.
   It breaks my heart that you should still remember.

Con.
   Well, well, be not thus moved, my worthy Heugho,
   I know I am forgiv'n; but lay thy hand,
   Thine aged hand, upon thy master's head,
   And give him a last blessing. Thou art now
   Like to an ancient father with us grown,
   And my heart says that it will do me good.

 Bowing his head, whilst Heugho , lifting up his aged hands over him, is unable to speak, but bursts into tears, and falls upon his master's neck. The band of friends close round and conceal them: afterwards they open to make way, and Constantine comes forward with a firm enlightened countenance.
   And now, my noble friends, it pleases me
   To think we all are knit in holy bands
   Of fellowship; prepared, in virtue's strength,
   Nobly to fight on earth, or meet in heaven.

Othus.
   Yes, Constantine, we to each other will
   True brothers prove, and to our noble chief
   Devoted followers, whate'er betide.
   What say ye, valiant friends?

Omnes.
                                            All, all of us!



 
Con.
   I know you will, full well, I know you will.
   Oh, that on earth it had been granted me
   Your gen'rous love to've recompensed! alas!
   Ye can but share with me—

Omnes.
                                            No other recompense,
   But sharing fates with thee, our noble chief,
   Do we desire, and on thy royal hand
   Here will we seal it.

Con.

 eagerly preventing them as they are about to kneel and kiss his hands .
   Forbear! forbear! within these sacred walls
   Bend before worthless man the humble knee!
   Fy, let not such shame be!
   Am I your chief? then be it shown in this,
   That to the mighty Majesty of heaven
   I humbly bow, more lowly than ye all,
   And do, on your behalf, devoutly beg
   The blessing of our Master and our Sire.

 Kneeling and bowing his head very low to the ground, then rising afterwards with dignified solemnity.
   Now to those sacred rites of our blest faith,
   In which the humble soul ennobled bows,
   In mem'ry of the dearest brothership
   That ever honour'd man, I lead you on,
   My noble brothers.


 Exeunt Constantine , &c., by another aisle, which may be supposed to lead to the altar of the church, whilst several priests are seen at a distance in their robes, as if waiting to receive them.
SCENE III.
A hall, or ante-room in the imperial palace.

Enter Petronius and Marthon disguised.
Pet.
   So far hath this well-counterfeited signet,
   And this disguise, befriended us: here stop:
   Whilst Constantine and his mad band are absent
   On their religious ceremony, here
   We will remain conceal'd until that Ella,
   Returning for 'tis near her wonted time,
   As they have told us from Valeria's chamber,
   Shall give us fair occasion.—Rouse thee, Marthon;
   Thou seemst like one bereaved of all sense;
   What is the matter with thee?

Mar.
   Nothing; but thus to pass with culprit feet
   Beneath the shade of night, these well-known courts,
   Which I so oft have trod in front of day,
   With the firm footsteps of an honest man,
   Doth make me—

Pet.
                                            Fy! thou art become a fool.
   Shake off such weakness: we're compell'd to this.
   We shall beneath the Sultan's iron sway,
   Disgraced from the late failure of our plots,
   Live like lash'd slaves, if the bewitching beauty
   Of my young Ella come not to our aid
   To bend his rugged nature. Strong in her,
   We shall not merely safe protection find,
   But highest favour and authority;
   And though by stealth I needs must bear her hence,
   Being my daughter, I, in nature's right—

Mar.
   Hush! now I hear a lightly-sounding step.
   Draw back a little space.


 They step aside, whilst Ella enters, and walks across the stage.
Pet.

 in a half voice, stealing softly up to her .
   Ella!

Ella

 starting .
   What voice is that which names me?

Pet.
   Ella!

Ella.
   Oh! 'tis the sound that I most dread to hear!

Pet.
   Sayst thou so, Ella, of thy father's voice?
   Have my misfortunes, with the world's fair favour,
   Deprived me also of my only child?

Ella.
   No, no! they have not: had misfortune only
   Cast its dark shade upon thee, I had loved thee
   And cherish'd thee in a lone desert, father!
   But—but thou art—

Pet.
                                            Ha! wherefore dost thou pause?
   What wouldst thou say? what is there in thy mind?

Ella.
   Thoughts which I will not utter—Oh, depart!
   Thou'rt not in safety. All men do condemn thee.
   Thou art not come for good.—Oh, fly from hence!
   Ruin, and shame, and death abide thee here:
   Oh, fly, my wretched father!

Pet.
   Yes I will fly, but thou shalt go with me;
   If not, I will remain and meet my fate.

Ella.
   Good heaven forbid! thou'lt drive me to distraction.
   O misery!


 Wrings her hands in great distress, whilst Marthon advances to Petronius with supplicating look.
Pet.

 to Marthon .
   Away! thou art a fool: we must be firm.

 To Ella. 
   Wring not thy hands thus wildly, simple maid:
   Thou goest to be with me no wand'ring outlaw,
   But one in splendour greater than a queen:
   The favour'd mistress of the mighty Sultan.


 Ella gives a loud shriek, and struggles to escape from him.

Enter Rodrigo.
Rod.
   Audacious villain! quit thy cursed hold,
   Or take death for thy pains.
   Ha! thou shrinkst back, and mufflest up thy face.
   Say who thou art, or through thy villain's heart
   I'll thrust this rapier.

Ella

 pulling Rodrigo back .
   Hold, I do beseech thee.
   For pity, hold! it is my wretched father.

Rod.
   Wretched indeed!

Ella.
                                            Ay, therefore pity him.
   Let him escape: he hath done me no harm.
   He is here as a fox in his last wiles,


 
   Who shelter seeks within the very kennel
   Of the roused pack: Oh, have some pity on him!
   He is my father.

Rod.
   Sweet Ella, hang not thus upon mine arm:
   It hath no power to strike whom thou callst father,
   Shame as he is unto that honour'd name.
   But there are ties upon me, gentle maid:
   The safety and the interests of Constantine
   I am bound to defend: and shall a traitor—

Ella.
   Oh! oh!

Rod.
   Fear not: our royal master is return'd
   From blessed rites of holiest charity
   With meekly chasten'd soul: whate'er his crimes
   He is in safety—safety as assured
   As thine own harmless self.


Enter Constantine.
Con.

 to Rodrigo .
   Thou speakst with an unwonted earnestness;
   I've mark'd thy gestures; something moves thee much.
   Who are these strangers?

 Turning to Petronius and Marthon , who, uncovering their faces, stand confessed before him.
   Ha! Marthon and Petronius! What new treason
   Is now on foot, that here—but judge I harshly?
   Ye are, perhaps, struck with the circumstances
   Of these most solemn times, repentant grown,
   And if ye be, in a good hour ye come;
   I am myself a wean'd and pardon'd man.
   Marthon, thou once wast wont to speak the truth;
   What brought you hither?

Mar.
   Most gracious prince, with no repentant mind
   We hither came; but one of us, at least,
   Shall hence depart with a heart deeply smitten.

Con.
   Confess then what new treason ye devised.

Ella.
   No treason; none to thee, most royal Constantine.
   For me he came, arm'd with a parent's right,
   To bear me to the haughty Sultan's camp,
   To live in queenly state. But, Oh protect me!
   Let me remain and die with those I love
   In decent maiden pride. Retain me here,
   But pardon him: no treason brought him hither.

Con.
   Petronius, has thy daughter told me true;
   Was this thine errand?

Pet.

 approaching Constantine .
   Yes, most gracious prince.

Con.
   Off then, disgrace to nature and to manhood!
   Wouldst thou to shameful and degrading slavery
   Betray thy virtuous child? Say thou cam'st hither
   To thrust i' the dark thy dagger through my heart,
   And I will call thee sinless.

Pet.
   Wherefore this stern and bitter execration?
   I came to place her but a few hours sooner,
   Saved from th' approaching storm, where your high dames,
   Yea, with their royal mistress at their head,
   Full shortly shall be placed.

Con.
   Detested wretch! what fiend has whisper'd to thee
   Such hideous thoughts? man durst not utter them.

Pet.
   Man might, at least, surveying the position
   And aspect of these times, in his own mind
   This plain and shrewd conjecture form. But not
   On such loose bottom do I ground my words;
   Mah'met himself hath sworn that your Valeria
   Shall at the head of his most favour'd wives—

Con.
   Hold thy detested tongue! for one word more
   Is instant death. Tempt me not with these hands,
   Which hath the symbols touch'd of blessed peace,
   To do a horrible act.

Pet.
   I but repeat that which the Sultan hath
   In public said.

Con.
                                            Forbear! forbear! I tell thee.

 Wrenching his sword, scabbard and all, from his side, and tossing it from him.
   There! there! Rodrigo: cast it from my reach:
   Let not a weapon be within my grasp,
   Or I shall be accursed.

 After a violent struggle of passion.
   I dare speak to him now.—Ho! guards without!

Ella.
   Oh, mercy! mercy!


Enter Guards.
Con.

 to guards .
   Take these two men, Petronius and his friend,
   And through the city to our outmost post
   Conduct them safely: there, in perfect liberty,
   Permit them to depart where'er they list.

 To Petronius. 
   Now, I'm revenged upon thee: get thee hence,
   And utter not a word.—Go thou, Rodrigo,
   And with the gentle Ella in thy hand,
   Conduct them to the palace gate. Hence quickly!

Mar.
   Nay, let Petronius go: I will remain,
   And with the meanest soldier on your walls
   Spend my last blood, if a true penitent—

Con.

 waving him off impatiently .
   Well, be it as thou wilt: but hence and leave me!

Rod.

 to Ella , as he leads her out .
   Did I not tell thee he was safe, my Ella?


 Exeunt all but Constantine , who, after walking up and down for some time in a perturbed manner, starts at the sound of Valeria 's voice without.
Con.
   Ha! here she comes! alas! how shall I now
   Look on her face, and hear her voice of love!
   It is distraction!


Enter Valeria.
Val.
   My Constantine, art thou so long return'd,
   And yet to me no kindly summons sent,
   Long as I've watched for it? What is the matter?


 
   Thy brow is dark: these are disturbed looks:
   What is the matter?

Con.
                                            Nothing, nothing.
   I am, thou knowst, with many cares perplex'd.
   Follow me to thine own apartment; here
   I cannot speak to thee.

Val.

 aside, looking eagerly at him as they go out. 
   What may this be?


 Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
Valeria 's apartment.

Enter Constantine , followed by Valeria , who both remain silent for some time, she looking anxiously with wistful expectation.
Val.
   Now we are here, my lord, in the still privacy
   Of this my inmost bower, but thou art silent.

 Pauses, and he is still silent.
   There is a look of sadness on thy face
   Of disturb'd wretchedness, that never yet,
   E'en in thy darkest hours, I've seen thee wear.
   Why art thou thus?

Con.
   And dost thou ask? I've been, in deep humility,
   Making a sinner's peace with God and man,
   And now—and now—


 His voice faltering.
Val.
   What would you say, my lord?

Con.
   And now I am with thee.

Val.
   And art thou sad for this? hast thou not still,
   Loose from all shackles of imposed state,
   Been with me in thine hours of joy or grief,
   Like a way-faring man, who sitting down
   On the green bank, his cumbrous vestment opens
   To the soft breeze?

Con.
   Yes, my Valeria; I have been with thee
   As with a true yoked heart, so strong in love,
   That e'en the thought, which scudded o'er my mind
   With culprit's speed from shameful consciousness,
   Was not from thee conceal'd.
   But now the hour is come, when e'en with thee
   I must perform a task—a task of pain.

Val.
   Speak; what meanst thou?

Con.
   All have, e'en in the dearest intercourse
   Of heart with heart, in some untoward moment
   Transgressors been, and proved the cause of pain
   Where most they should have banish'd it: and all,
   In quitting earthly ties, do anxiously
   Desire, in the true blessing of forgiveness,
   To part with those whom they have held most dear.
   Now dost thou understand me?


 Holding out both his hands to her.
Val.
   I do! I do! thou hast my dearest blessing;
   The dearest thoughts and worship of my heart.
   But oh! what dost thou say?—part!—how, my Constantine!
   Where dost thou go? thou dost not leave the city?

Con.
   No, love, but on its wall I go ere long,—
   For in a little hour the day will break
   Which must its fate decide,—that part to act,
   Which, before God and man, in honest pride,
   I'm call'd on to perform.

Val.
   But from those walls victorious thou'lt return.

 Constantine smiles sorrowfully.
   Nay, but thou shalt return: high heav'n decrees it;
   Virtue, and every good and blessed thing
   Have made it sure. E'en in a faith as strong
   As at this moment I do hold to this,
   Methinks, upon the chafed and tossing waves
   Of the wild deep I could thus firmly tread,
   Nor wet my sandal's thong.

 Walking across the stage with firm steps of stately confidence, and then going up to him with an encouraging smile.
                                            Be thou assured!
   I know it shall be so. A mystic sage,
   Whom I, unknown to thee, have visited—
   Pardon this weakness of thine anxious wife—
   Darting his eye on forms of woven air,
   Saw thee in combat with a Turkish champion,
   And saw the crescent fall.

Con.
   And mayst thou not believe, that ere they close
   Their mortal warfare, many a boastful Turk
   Beneath these arms shall fall?

Val.
   Ay, but on surer words I rest my faith!
   For I did bid him onward cast his eye
   Into time's reach, and say, who of this city,
   After the course of twelve revolving moons,
   Should be the sov'reign lord; and he replied,
   In plain and simple words, thy lord and husband.

Con.
   And named he Constantine?

Val.
   What other name but that of Constantine
   Could to these appellations be conjoin'd?
   Thou turnest from me with perturbed looks:
   Thou shalt not turn away: tell me! O, tell me!
   What sudden thought is this that troubles thee?


 Catching hold of him eagerly as he turns from her.
Con.
   Ask not; Oh, do not ask! 'tis pass'd already
   As shoots a glaring meteor 'thwart the night,
   Frightful but hasty.

Val.
                                            Thou must tell it me.

Con.
   Distract me not.

Val.
                                            Nay, nay, but thou must tell me.
   What other name but that of Constantine
   Could to my lord and husband joined be?

Con.

 sinking down upon a chair quite overcome, and covering his face with his hands, as he speaks with a quick perturbed voice .
   Mahomet! Mahomet!

 Valeria steps back from him, holding up her hands in amazement; then he, after a pause, looking up to her with a self-upbraiding eye.
   I have offended in this very hour


 
   When my press'd soul sigh'd for that loving peace
   Which in its earthly close the soul desires.
   I have offended.

Val.
                                            Yes, thou hast offended.
   All the offences thou hast ever done me
   Are in this fell and cruel stroke comprised;
   And any other stroke, compared to this.
   Had fall'n upon me lightly.

Con.
   It was a thought that hasted fast away,
   And came unbidden.


 Going up to her penitently.
Val.

 turning away in anger .
   There is no thought doth ever cross the mind,
   Till some preceding kindred sentiment
   Hath made a pathway for it.

Con.
   Yes, my Valeria, thou indeed sayst true;
   But turn not from me angrily. My mind,
   Ere now, consider'd has the character,
   The faith, the power of Mahomet.—Frown not.—
   Valeria, thou art fair.—Nay, do not frown!

Val.
   What dost thou say? hast thou until this moment
   Reserved for me this base degrading—No:
   Torn and defaced be every hated form
   Of outward grace! it is our curse, our shame!


 Tearing her hair violently.
Con.
   O be not thus!—forgive a hasty thought!
   Think how a doating husband is distracted,
   Who knows too well a lawless victor's power.

Val.
   What is his power? it nought regardeth me.

Con.
   Alas! the frowns of a detesting bride
   Deter him not!

Val.

 smiling contemptuously .
                                            But will he wed the dead?

Con.

 starting .
   What sayst thou? Oh, what meaning is there here!
   Yes, yes! I know it all! but it is dreadful:
   It makes the cold chill o'er my limbs to creep:
   It is not well: it is not holy. No!
   O no, my noble love, mine honour'd love!
   Give to thy fallen lord all that the soul
   To widow'd love may give, but oh, stop there!
   Heav'n will protect thee in the hour of need;
   And for the rest, erase it from thy thoughts,
   Give it no being there.

Val.
   It hath no being there. Heav'n will protect me:
   And he who thinks me helpless thinks me mean.

Con.
   I think thee all that e'er was tenanted
   Of noblest worth in loveliest female form:
   By nature excellent, defective only
   In this, that fortune has thy virtues link'd
   To the vex'd spirit of a ruin'd man,
   Who in his hours of anguish has not prized them
   As did become their worth.

Val.

 rushing into his arms .
   No, thou hast prized them,
   In thy blind love, far, far beyond their worth.
   My uncurb'd passions have alas! too oft
   Vexation added to that burden'd heart
   I should have cheer'd and lighten'd: on my head
   Rests all the blame that e'er between us pass'd,
   And I alone have need to be forgiven.


 They weep on one another's necks without speaking, when an alarm bell is heard at a distance, and Constantine breaks suddenly from her.
Con.
   It is the 'larum of my farther watch.

Val.
   I scarcely heard it: art thou sure of it?


 A second alarm bell heard nearer.
Con.
   And hark! a nearer tower repeats the sound.
   The enemy's in motion.—I must arm,
   And instantly.

Val.
   Then let me be with thee till the last moment!
   I have a holy relic of great power;
   It is, I trust, worth all thine arms beside;
   And from this hand of love thou shalt receive it.

Con.

 smiling sorrowfully .
   Thanks, sweet Valeria! from thy hand of love
   I will with love receive whate'er thou wilt.

 A third alarm bell is heard still louder, and enter attendants in haste.
   Yes, yes, I heard it; go, prepare mine arms.


 To attendants, and exeunt.
SCENE V.
A spacious hall in the palace.

Enter Rodrigo , with Ella hanging fondly upon him, and continue their way as if intending to pass through it, when a trumpet sounds without, and they stop short.
Rod.
   It is the sound that summons us to meet:
   There is no farther grace: therefore, sweet Ella,
   My pretty Ella, my good loving Ella,
   My gentle little one, that hangst upon me
   With such fond hold, in good sooth we must part,
   Here bid heav'n bless me, and no farther go.

Ella.
   Must it be so? I will bid heaven bless thee,
   And all good saints watch o'er thy precious life;
   And they will bless and guard thee in the hour
   Of fearful death. In this I have true faith;
   Yet, on the very brink, to hold thee thus
   Clasp'd in my grasp, and think how soon—Alas!
   From many points will fly the whizzing balls,
   And showering darts, and jav'lins sent afar,
   Aim'd by fell strength; wilt thou escape all this?

Rod.
   Fear not, sweet Ella! whizzing balls there be,
   That, in midway, are from their course declined
   By the poor orphan's little lisped prayer;
   And there be arrows that are turn'd aside,
   In their swift flight, by the soft sighs of love,
   Unheard of earthly ears. This is a creed,
   In the good faith of which poor seamen climb


 
   Their rocking masts, in the full roar of battle,
   And we'll believe it.

Ella.
   It is a blessed one: I would believe it.

Rod.
   Yes, we'll believe it. Whilst our battle roars,
   Thou'lt think of me in thy lone distant tower,
   And be to me a gallant armed mate,
   With prayers and wishes striving powerfully.
   Give me thy hand: we will not weep and wail:
   We will part cheerfully.—God bless thee, Ella!
   Nay, hang not on me thus.
   Thou lov'st a brave man: be thou valiant then,
   As suits a brave man's love.

Ella.
   O no! I've fondly fix'd myself upon thee,
   Most worthless and unsuited to thy worth.
   Like a poor weed on some proud turret's brow,
   I wave, and nod, and kiss the air around thee,
   But cannot be like thee.

Rod.
   Heav'n bless thee, little flower! I prize thee more
   Than all the pride of female stateliness.

Ella.
   Dost thou? then I am happy: I am proud:
   I will not wish me other than I am.

Rod.
   Ah, if we part not instantly, my Ella,
   I feel in faith, rude as my nature is,
   I soon shall be like thee!—My friends approach:
   Let us not meet their gaze—It must be so—
   Sweet one, farewell!—Wilt thou still cling to me?

Ella.
   O no, I go: they shall not see thee weep,
   Though I do bless thee for it.

Rod.

 leading her hastily back to the door by which they entered .
   Well then, brave lass, upon thy lovely head
   Heaven's favour rest!—Nay, do not speak to me.

 Preventing her as she is endeavouring to speak.
   Farewell! farewell!

 Exit Ella , and he returns to the front of the stage, where he stands musing sorrowfully; when enters to him Justiniani , and, going up to him, touches his shoulder.
   What dost thou want?


 Turning angrily.
Jus.
   Thou'rt thoughtful.

Rod.
                                            No, I think as others do
   With such day's work before them, in good truth,
   Not passing merrily.

Jus.
   From the high tower I've seen th' approaching foe:
   It seems a dark and strangely-mixed mass
   Of life, wide moving in the misty light
   Of early dawn.—I've fought in many a field,
   As valiant men and armed warriors fight,
   But such a strange assemblage of new modes
   Of mingled war as we this day must face,
   I never yet encounter'd.

Rod.
   Well, we shall know the scent and flavour of it,
   When we have tasted it.

Jus.
   We shall be smother'd up with the mean press
   Of worthless matter, as a noble steed,
   Beneath the falling rafters of his shed
   Ignobly perishes.

Rod.
   Fear not, proud soul; we shall have men to fight,
   And room enough in some nook of the breach
   To grapple with them too.

Jus.
   Good fortune ever shone on thee, Rodrigo:
   Thou still hast been a bold careering bark,
   Outriding ev'ry storm. If thou shouldst e'er
   Again return to our dear native land,
   Tell to my countrymen whate'er thou knowst
   Pertaining to my fate this fateful day:
   Let me not be forgotten.

Rod.
   I will, my friend: but better fate than thine
   I look not for, though still I bear myself
   As one assured of good.—Thou'rt dark and gloomy—
   Does aught rest on thy mind?

Jus.

 striding away from him gloomily .
   No, nothing, nothing!


 A trumpet sounds without.
Rod.
   Ay, hark! another of our gallant band
   Has join'd us with his followers.

 Another trumpet sounds.
   And now another: are they all assembled?


Enter Othus , and several of the imperial friends.
Othus.
   On their high wooden turrets, and huge beams
   Of warlike engines, raised aloft in air,
   Gleams the first light of this high-fated day;
   And, wide expanded, through the farther mists
   Moves the dark Turkish host.
   Thou'rt a tried soul, Rodrigo, I but new
   To such tremendous, strange expectancy:
   Now is the hour when the soul knows itself.


 Rising on tiptoe with a conscious smile.
Rod.
   Ay, Othus, thou dost wear the countenance
   Of a true man: give me thine honest hand.
   Are all our friends assembled?


 Trumpet sounds.
Othus.
   This says they are: and here comes, last of all,
   Our northern friends.
Enter more of the friends.

   Now we are all assembled. Constantine,
   He also comes; and sadly by his side,
   In mournful dignity, moves his high dame,
   Proudly contending with her woman's heart.


Enter Constantine and Valeria , attended.
Con.

 returning the general salute of the chiefs .
   Good morrow, noble brothers and brave leaders:
   Are we all here convened?

Othus.
   Yes, our great chief and brother: of your friends
   There lacks not one.



 
Con.
   Then to their love, so help me, Mighty Power,
   Who holdst within thy grasp the souls of men!
   Neither shall we be lacking.—Now, Valeria.


 Drawing himself up with a proud but tender smile, as if to encourage her to behave nobly.
Val.
   I understand that smile.
   Here with thy gen'rous friends, whose love to thee
   Most dearly cell'd within my heart I wear,
   And unto whom I have desired much,
   Before we part, these grateful thanks to pay—

 Making grateful obeisance to the chiefs.
   Here to those noble friends, and to God's keeping,
   I leave thee.—Yet, be it permitted me—
   For that thy noble head and lib'ral brow
   Have ever cheer'd me as my star of day,
   Blessings and blessings let me pour upon them!

 Putting her hand upon his head fervently, and kissing his forehead.
   For that thy gen'rous breast has been the hold
   Of all my treasured wishes and dear thoughts,
   This fond embrace.

 Embracing him.
                                            Yea, and for that thou art
   My sire, and sov'reign, and most honour'd lord,
   This humble homage of my heart receive!


 Kneeling and kissing his hand.
Con.

 raising and embracing her with great emotion .
   No more, my dearest and most noble love!
   Spare me, O spare me! Heaven be thy protection!
   Farewell!

Val.
   Farewell!


 Valeria is led off by her attendants, whilst Constantine continues looking sadly after her for some time, then turning to his friends, who gather about him, without saying a word, they go all off the stage together in profound silence.
ACT V. SCENE I.
An open space near the walls of the city, with halfruined houses on each side, and a row of arched pillars thrown across the middle of the stage, as if it were the remains of some ruined public building; through which is seen, in the background, a breach in the walls, and the confused fighting of the besieged, enveloped in clouds of smoke and dust. The noise of artillery, the battering of engines, and the cries of the combatants heard as the curtain draws up, and many people discovered on the front of the stage, running about in great hurry and confusion, and some mounted upon the roofs of the houses overlooking the battle.
Voice

 calling from the wall .
   See! see! how, cluster'd on each other's backs,
   They mount like swarming bees, or locusts link'd
   In bolt'ring heaps! Pour fire upon their heads!

 d voice.
   Cast down huge beams upon them!

 d voice.
   Hurl down the loosen'd fragments of our wall!

 th voice.
   Ho! more help here! more stones! more beams! more fire!
   Weapons are useless now.

 st voice.
   See how that giant Turk, like an arch fiend,
   Climbs on you living mountain of curved backs!
   He gains the wall! O hurl him headlong down!
   He is hurl'd down.


 A great shout from the besieged.
 d voice.
   Send to the emperor or to Rodrigo:
   They on their diff'rent stations hold it bravely;
   This is the weakest point. Ho! send for aid!


 Exeunt several soldiers from the walls, as if running for succour. The noise of artillery, &c. is heard as before, and afterwards a loud crash as of some building falling. Enter many people in great terror from the walls, running off by the front of the stage different ways, and enter at the same time Constantine and some of his friends, who stop them.
Con.
   Turn, turn! O turn, my friends! another push!
   Let us still stop the breach, or fall like men.

 Enter Justiniani from the walls with a hasty and disordered step, pale and writhing with pain.
   Merciful heav'n! do mine eyes serve me truly?
   Justiniani, with pale haggard face,
   Retiring from his post!
   Where are you going, chief!


 Stopping him sternly.
Just.
   Where nature, urged beyond the pith of nature,
   Compels me. 'Midst yon streams of liquid fires,
   And hurling ruins and o'erwhelming mass
   Of things unknown, unseen, uncalculable,
   All arms and occupation of a soldier
   Are lost and turn'd to nought: man's strength is nought:
   The fangs of hell are in my new-torn flesh:
   I must on for a space and breathe fresh air.

Con.
   Go to! this moment is the quiv'ring ridge
   That stands between our success or our ruin:—
   The sight of thy turn'd back from their screw'd pitch
   Will turn more hearts than all the pressing foe:
   Thou must not go.

Just.
                                            I am a mortal man:
   The fangs of fiends are in my new-torn flesh:
   Nature compels me, and I must have succour.


 Exit hastily, and writhing with pain.
Con.
   Alas! God pity him! one luckless moment
   Of weakness and of anguish brings to him
   A wound that cannot be up-bound. Poor nature!

 Enter many fugitives from the walls.


 
   Turn, turn! O soldiers! let not this shame be!
 To the fugitives.

 As he is endeavouring with his friends to rally them and push forward, a terrible shout is heard, and enter a great crowd of fugitives from the walls.

   What shout was that?

Fugitive.
   The Turks have gained the breach, and through it pour
   Like an o'erboiling flood.

Con.
   Then is the city lost—the dark hour come—
   And as an emperor my task is closed.
   God's will be done!

 Throwing away the imperial purple.
   Now is there left for me these sinew'd arms,
   And this good sword, the wherewithal to earn
   A noble soldier's death.
   Come on with me who will, and share the fate
   Of a brave comrade.

A fugitive

 joined by several others .
   Yes, we'll share thy fate,
   Comrade or sov'reign, noble Constantine!
   We will die by thy side.


 Exit Constantine , followed by his friends and several of the fugitives, and passing through the pillars to the background, rushes amidst the confusion of the fight. A terrible noise of arms, &c. and presently one of the pillars in the middle of the stage falling down, a wider view of the battle is opened, and the Turks are seen rushing through the breach, and bearing every thing before them.

Re-enter Constantine wounded, but still fighting bravely, though oppressed with numbers, and falls down near the front of the stage, the enemy passing on and leaving him.
Con.
   Am I then left?
   Oh, is there ne'er a Christian soldier near me
   That will cut off my head? Ho! thou Turk there!


 To a Turk who is going to pass him.
Turk.
   Art thou not dead?

Con.
   No, one half of me, Turk, is living still,

 Raising himself half up from the ground.
   And still a match for thee.

Turk.
   Ha! sayst thou so? we'll put it to the proof.
   Yet thou'rt a brave man, though thou art a Greek,
   I would far rather let thee die in peace.

Con.
   No, no! have at thee!

 Pushing at the Turk with his sword, who, turning against him as he is half raised from the ground, thrusts him through the body.
   I thank thee, friendly foeman, this will do:
   Thou hast done me good service.

Turk.
   And thou art welcome to it. Fare thee well!
   A good death to thee! for thou art no Greek.


 Exit.
Con.
   Ay, this will do: this hath the true stern gripe
   Of potent speedy death. My task is closed.
   I now put off these weeds of flesh and blood,
   And, thanks be unto Him who clothed me in them!
   Untarnish'd with disgrace. What cometh after
   Full surely cometh well. 'Tis a dark pass.—

 Catching at a dropped garment that has been left by some of the fugitives on the ground near him.
   Here is a ready shround to wrap my head:
   This death deals shrewdly with me.


 Covers his face and dies, after a considerable struggle.

Enter Rodrigo, Othus , and Marthon , with two or three of their followers, fighting bravely with a party of Turks, whom they beat off the stage.
Othus.
   Now for a space those ruffians stand aloof:
   This is a pause that calls upon the mind:
   What shall we do?

Rod.
   How do men act, when they together stand,
   On the last perch of the swift-sinking wreck?
   Do they not bravely give their parting cheer,
   And make their last voice loud and boldly sound
   Amidst the hollow roarings of the storm?
   E'en so will we: we'll bear our manhood up
   To the last push.

Othus.
   Thou speakest well, brave seaman: thou dost speak
   What the heart owns: we will do even so.
   But oh, that our brave leader now were near us,
   Living or dead! Doth no one know his fate?
   I thought by him to have died.

 st fol.
   What corpse is this so cover'd? on its sandal
   It wears th' imperial bird in fretted gold.

Othus.
   Then it is he!

 Tearing off the covering eagerly from the head of Constantine.
   O thou brave heart! thou hast gone to thy rest
   With honour. Heav'n be praised that thou hast!
   Here round thee our last gathering point shall be:
   Here will we fight, nor shall thy honour'd body
   Suffer, whilst one of us has strength to fight,
   The slightest insult.

Rod.
   Ay, they shall hack us into raven's meat,
   Ere on his gallant corpse there be impress'd
   One touch of impious hands!


 A loud noise of shrieking and terror heard without.
Othus.
   Hear the wild cries of terror and despair,
   Mix'd with the din of carnage! Now those cowards,
   Who let this brave man all unaided perish,
   Are suff'ring that which, in his fellest pinch,
   The valiant never suffers.
   But see, the enemy again returns
   With doubled fury!



 
Rod.
   Come they? then we are ready for them. Yonder
   Stands a small walled dome, within whose portal
   We for a time may face ten thousand foes:
   There will we take our stand, and there will we
   Do our last deeds of men. Come on, brave mates!
   Take up our honour'd treasure; and, so burden'd,
   He that doth grapple with us had as lief
   Pull from the lion's hug his bosom'd whelp.


 The followers take up the body, and Othus and Rodrigo retire, defending it bravely from a party of Turks, who enter and fall upon them as they are bearing it off.
SCENE II.
An apartment in one of the towers of the palace.

Enter Valeria in great alarm, followed by Lucia and attendants.
Val.
   Louder and louder still the dreadful sound
   Of battle swells. Is it not nearer us?
   This lofty tower the widest view commands;
   Open that lattice quickly.

 Pointing to a window which Lucia opens, and then, rushing on eagerly to look, shrinks back again.
   I pray thee look thyself, mine eyes are dark,
   And I see nothing. Oh, what seest thou?
   Tell me, whate'er it be.

Lucia

 looking out .
   Nothing but clouds of smoke and eddying dust:
   A dun and grumly darkness spreads o'er all,
   From which arise those horrid sounds, but nought
   Distinctive of the sight can I discern.

Val.

 after pacing backward and forward with an unequal, restless, agitated step .
   Oh, will this state of tossing agony
   No termination have! Send out, I pray thee,
   Another messenger.

Lucia.
   Indeed I have in little space of time
   Sent many forth, but none return again.

Val.
   In little space! Oh it hath been a term
   Of horrible length! such as rack'd fiends do reckon
   Upon their tossing beds of surgy flames,
   Told by the lashes of each burning tide
   That o'er them breaks. Hark! the quick step of one
   With tidings fraught! Dost thou not hear it?

Lucia.
                                            No;
   I hear it not.

Val.
   Still is it the false coinage of my fears?
   Ah! hearing, sight, and every sense is now
   False and deceitful grown. I'll sit me down,
   And think no more, but let the black hour pass
   In still and fixed stupor o'er my head.


 Sits down upon a low seat, and supports her bended head upon both her hands.
Lucia

 listening .
   Now I do hear the sound of real feet
   In haste approaching.

Val.

 starting up .
   Some one brings us tidings.
   What may they be? Quick steps should bring us good.
Enter Messenger.

   Say all thou hast to say, and say it quickly.
   If it be good, hold up thy blessed hand,
   And I will bless the token. No, thou dost not!
   'Tis evil then. How is it with my lord?
   What dangers still encompass him?

Mes.
                                            No dangers.

Val.
   And dost thou say so with that terrible look?
   Is he alive? Have all deserted him?

Mes.
   No, round his body still some brave men fight,
   And will not quit him till they be as he is.


 Valeria , uttering a loud shriek, falls back into the arms of her attendants, and is carried off, followed by Lucia and the messenger.
SCENE III.
A hall in the palace.

Enter a crowd of frightened women, and seem hurrying on to some place of greater security.
 st woman

 stopping .
   No, we are wrong; we'll to the eastern tower,
   That is the most retired; that last of all
   Will tempt their search.

 d woman.
   In the deep vaulted caverns of the palace,
   Might we not for a while conceal'd remain,
   Till heav'n shall send us means?

Omnes.
   Ay, thou art right; that is the best of all:
   We'll to the vaults.


 As they are all turning and hurrying back again, enter a domestic officer of the palace, and stops them.
Offi.
   Where do ye run with such wild looks of fear?
   Think ye the Turks are passing through the city,
   Like the short visit of a summer's storm,
   That you in holes and rocks may safely hide
   Until it be o'erblown?

 st woman.
   Oh, no! we know that they are come for ever!
   Yet for a little while we fain would save us
   From fearful things.

Offi.
   I come to tell you that by Mah'met's orders
   The cruel Turks have stopp'd their bloody work,
   And peace again is in our walls.

 st woman.
                                            Sayst thou?
   And art thou sure of this? and hast thou seen it?

Offi.
   Yes, I have seen it. Like a sudden gleam


 
   Of fierce returning light at the storm's close,
   Glancing on horrid sights of waste and sorrow,
   Came the swift word of peace, and to the eye
   Gave consciousness of that which the wild uproar
   And dire confusion of the carnage hid.

 st woman.
   Alas! be there such sights within our walls?

Offi.
   Yes, maid, such sights of blood! such sights of nature!
   In expectation of their horrid fate,
   Widows, and childless parents, and lorn dames,
   Sat by their unwept dead with fixed gaze,
   In horrible stillness.
   But when the voice of grace was heard aloud,
   So strongly stirr'd within their roused souls
   The love of life, that, even amidst those horrors,
   A joy was seen—joy hateful and unlovely.
   I saw an aged man rise from a heap
   Of grizly dead, whereon, new murder'd, lay
   His sons and grandsons, yea, the very babe
   Whose cradle he had rock'd with palsied hands,
   And shake his grey locks at the sound of life
   With animation wild and horrible.
   I saw a mother with her murder'd infant
   Still in her arms fast lock'd, spring from the ground—
   No, no! I saw it not! I saw it not!
   It was a hideous fancy of my mind:
   I have not seen it.
   But I forget my chiefest errand here.

 st woman.
   And what is that!

Offi.
   It is to bid you tell your royal mistress,
   It may, perhaps, somewhat assuage her grief,
   That Othus and Rodrigo, with some followers,
   The last remains of the imperial band,
   Fighting, in all the strength of desperation,
   Around the body of their fallen chief,
   Have moved to gen'rous thoughts the Sultan's breast;
   Who has their valour honour'd with full leave,
   In blessed ground, with military pomp,
   Becoming his high state and valiant worth,
   To lay his dear remains. This with their lives
   On honourable terms he freely grants.

 st woman.
   And do those brave men live?

Offi.
   They do; but Othus soon I fear will be
   With him he mourns.—Delay no more, I pray:
   Inform the empress speedily of this.

 st woman.
   Alas! she is not in a state to hear it:
   The phrenzy of her grief repels all comfort.—
   But softly!—hush!—methinks I hear her voice.
   She's coming hither in the restless wand'rings
   Of her untamed mind.—Stand we aside,
   And speak not to her yet.


Enter Valeria with her hair dishevelled, and in all the wild disorder of violent sorrow, followed by Ella and Lucia , who seem endeavouring to soothe her.
Val.
   Forbear all words, and follow me no more.
   I now am free to wander where I list;
   To howl i' the desert with the midnight winds,
   And fearless be amidst all fearful things.
   The storm has been with me, and I am left
   Torn and uprooted, and laid in the dust
   With those whom after-blasts rend not again.
   I am in the dark gulf where no light is.
   I am on the deep bed of sunken floods,
   Whose swoln and welt'ring billows rise no more
   To bear the tossed wreck back to the strand.

Lucia.
   Oh, say not so! heav'n doth in its good time
   Send consolation to the sharpest woe.
   It still in kindness sends to the tried soul
   Its keenest suff'rings. So say holy men;
   And therein good men trust.

Val.
   I hear, I hear thee! in mine ear thy voice
   Sounds like the feeble night-fly's humming noise,
   To him, who in the warfare of vex'd sleep,
   Strives with the phantoms of his inward world.
   Yes, there is comfort when the sun is dark,
   And time hath run his course, and the still'd sleepers
   Lift up their heads at the tremendous crash
   Of breaking worlds.—I know all this.—But here,
   Upon this living earth, what is there found?
   It is a place of groans and hopeless woe.
   Let me then tear my hair and wring my hands,
   And raise my voice of anguish and despair,
   This is my portion now, all else is gone.

Lucia.
   Nay, think not virtuous innocence forsaken:
   Put in high heav'n thy trust, it will sustain thee.

Val.
   Ah! I did think when virtue bravely stood,
   Fronting its valiant breast to the fierce onset
   Of worthless power, that it full surely stood:
   That ev'ry spiritual and righteous power
   Was on its side: and in this faith, ofttimes,
   Methought I could into the furnace mouth
   Have thrust my hand, and grasp'd the molten flames.
   Yet on his head it fell: that noble head,
   Upon whose manly gracefulness was fix'd
   The gaze of ev'ry eye.
   Oh! on his lib'ral front there beam'd a look,
   Unto the which all good and gen'rous hearts
   Answer return'd.—It was a gentle head,
   Bending in pleasant kindliness to all;
   So that the timid, who approach'd him trembling,
   With cheer'd and vaunting steps retired again.
   It was a crowned head, yet was it left
   Exposed and fenceless in the hour of danger:
   What should have been his safety was his bane.
   Away, poor mock'ry of a wretched state!

 Tearing the regal ornaments from her neck, and scattering them about.
   Be ye strew'd to the winds! But for this let
   We had been blest; for he as truly loved,
   In simplest tenderness. as the poor hind,
   Who takes his humble house-mate by the hand,
   And says, “this is my all.”—Off, cursed band!
   Which round our happiness hath been entwined


 
   Like to a straggling cord: upon the earth
   Be thou defaced and trampled!


 Tearing the tiara from her head and stamping upon it, then pacing up and down distractedly.
Lucia.
   Alas! my royal mistress, be entreated!
   This furious grief will but enhance its pain:
   Oh, bear yourself as more becomes your state!

Val.
   Yes, I will bear me as becomes my state.
   I am a thing of wretchedness and ruin.
   That upon which my pride and being grew
   Lies in the dust, and be the dust my bed.

 Throwing herself upon the ground, and pushing away Lucia and her other attendants, who endeavour to raise her up again.
   Forbear! forbear! and let me on the ground
   Spread out my wretched hands! It pleases me
   To think that in its bosom is a rest—
   Yea, there lie they unheeded and forgotten,
   To whom all tongues give praise, all hearts give blessing.
   Oh, ev'ry heart did bless him though he fell,
   And ne'er a saving hand was found—Oh! oh!


 Bursting into an agony of grief, and laying her head upon the ground, covered with both her hands.
Ella

 to Lucia and attendants .
   Do not surround her thus! I'll sit and watch her.
   I will not speak, but sit and weep by her;
   And she shall feel, e'en through her heavy woe,
   That sympathy and kindness are beside her.

Val.

 raising her head .
   There spoke a gentle voice: is Ella near me?

Ella.
   Yes, I am near, and shall be ever near you.

Val.
   Wilt thou? I do believe, sweet maid, thou wilt.
   Lay thy soft hand on mine.—Yes, it feels kindly.
   Had he, thy valiant love, been near his lord—
   Ay, they did love each other with that love
   Which brave men know—Oh, ev'ry noble stranger,
   In admiration of his noble worth,
   Did call him lord; whilst they, his native subjects,
   They who had seen him grow within their walls,—
   Alas! where lightly tripp'd his infant steps;
   Where in gay sports his stripling's strength was tried;
   Where tower'd in graceful pride his manly bloom;
   Even there a lifeless, ghastly form he lies.


Enter another domestic officer, and, seeing Valeria on the gr ound, steps back.
Lucia

 to the officer .
   What wouldst thou here?

Offi.
   I must, perforce, speak my unwelcome tidings.
   The Sultan is already in the palace,
   And follows hard my steps with a fix'd purpose
   To see the empress.

Val.

 raising herself half from the ground .
   What fearful words are these? in my soul's anguish
   Comes this so quickly on me? Be it so!
   I cleave to th' earth! what have I now to do?
   I am a stilled thing, abased and crush'd;
   What boots it now who gazes on my woe?


Enter Mahomet with Osmir and his train.
Mah.

 to Osmir , after looking at Valeria steadfastly .
   She stirs not, Osmir, e'en at my approach,
   She sits upon the ground, unmoved and still.
   Thou sorrow-clouded beauty, not less lovely

 Going up to her.
   For this thy mournful state!—She heeds me not.
   Empress and sov'reign dame, unto those titles
   Which thou shalt ever wear, vouchsafe regard.

 To Osmir. 
   Still she regards me not.

 After a pause. 
   Widow of Constantine—

Val.

 rousing herself quickly .
   Ay, now thou callest on me by a name
   Which I do hear. There is strength in the sound
   To do all possible things!

 Rising quickly from the ground, and accosting Mahomet with an air of high assumed state.
   What wouldst thou say to her who proudly wears
   That honour'd title?

Mah.
   Widow of Constantine; I come not here
   In the stern spirit of a conqu'ror.
   The slaughter of your people, by my order,
   Is stopp'd; and to your bravely fallen lord
   I have decreed such fun'ral obsequies
   As suit a valiant warrior and a king.
   Othus, and brave Rodrigo, and those men
   Who to the last their master's corpse defended,
   I have with honour graced.—Lacks there aught still
   That, from the dark cloud which so deeply shades
   That awful beauty, one approving ray
   Might softly draw? Speak, and it shall be done.

Val.
   Ask aught from thee!

Mah.
   Yes, whatsoe'er thou wilt:
   For now too well I feel I have no power
   That can oppose thy will.

Val.
   I give you thanks: I have a thing to ask.

Mah.
   Name it, and it is granted.

Val.
   A place in the quiet tomb with my fall'n lord,
   Therein to rest my head. This is my boon.

Mah.
   Well, and it shall be granted, fair Valeria,
   When that fair form is fitted for such rest.
   But whilst—


 Approaching her with an air of free admiration.
Val.

 putting him at a distance haughtily .
   No more:—I do not ask it sooner.
   Yet that it be a sealed deed between us,
   Permit me here to put into your hands
   A mark'd memorial. Some few paces off
   It is deposited; I will return
   And give it to you instantly.


 Exit, attended by Lucia, Ella , &c.


 
Mah.

 to Osmir , looking after her as she goes out .
   See, with what awful loveliness she moves!
   Did all our bower'd prisons e'er contain
   Aught like to that?

Osmir.
   It does indeed a wondrous mixture seem
   Of woman's loveliness with manly state;
   And yet, methinks, I feel as though it were
   Strange, and perplexing, and unsuitable.
   'Tis not in nature.

Mah.
                                            Thinkst thou so, good vizir?
   Thou'rt right, belike, but it is wondrous graceful.

 A loud shriek of women heard without.
   What shrieks are these? Run thou and learn the cause.


 Osmir going, is prevented by Valeria , who re-enters with her robe wrapped across her breast, and supported by Lucia , and Ella , and her other attendants, who seem in great affliction round her.
Val.

 speaking as she enters .
   Mourn not; the thing is past that was to be.
   Conduct me to the Sultan: I have still
   Strength to fulfil my task.

Mah.
   Great Prophet! what is this?
 To Valeria. 
What hast thou done?

Val.
   Brought thee the mark'd memorial of my right.

 Showing a dagger.
   And that I now am fitted for that rest,
   The honour'd rest which you have granted me,
   Being the fix'd condition of your promise,
   Here is the witness.


 Opening her robe, and showing the wound in her breast.
Mah.
   O sad and cruel sight! Is there no aid?
   O live, thou wondrous creature, and be aught
   Thy soul desires to be!

Val.

 after sinking back into a seat, supported by her attendants .
   I now am what my soul desires to be,
   And what one happy moment of strength wound
   Beyond the pitch of shrinking nature makes me;
   Widow of Constantine, without reproach,
   And worthy to partake the honour'd rest
   Of the brave lord whose living love I shared,
   As shares the noble wife a brave man's love.

Mah.
   Prophet of God, be there such ties as these!


Enter Rodrigo , and Othus wounded and supporting himself feebly upon his sheathed sword.
Val.
   And here come, in good time, my living friends:
   I shall once more those gen'rous men behold,
   The sad remains of those who loved their lord.

 Holding out a hand to each of them.
   You know, brave brothers, how it is with me;
   For such you were to him, and such to me
   My heart now truly owns you.

Othus.
   Yes, we have heard: they told us as we enter'd.
   Most noble woman, worthy of thy lord!


 Endeavouring feebly to kneel and kiss her hand, whilst Rodrigo does so on the other side of her.
Val.
   This day's rough tempest's o'er, my good Rodrigo,
   And thou still liv'st to strive in other storms:
   Heaven's high blessing and my dying thanks
   Rest on thy gen'rous worth!—I would say more,
   But now I feel I may not.
   Where art thou, Ella?

 Putting Ella 's hand in his.
                                            Here do I return
   The trust thou gavest me; and if the Sultan
   Will yet to me one last request vouchsafe,
   He will confirm this gift.

Mah.
   It is confirm'd.

Val.
                                            I thank you, gracious victor.
   Heaven bless you both!

 To Ella and Rodrigo , who both kneel and kiss her hands.
   Othus, the dead go to their silent rest,

 To Othus , looking fixedly at him.
   And are no more remember'd: but thy lord—
   He whom thou lovedst—he whom all hearts loved—
   He who so noble and so gentle was—
   Well skill'd art thou to paint the deeds of men—
   Thou wilt not suffer him to be forgotten?
   What means that woeful motion of thy head?
   Mine eyes wax dim, or do I truly see thee?
   Thy visage has a strange and ghastly look:
   How is it with thee?

Othus.
   As one who standeth at the city's gate,
   Through which his earlier friends have pass'd, and waits
   Impatiently, girt in his traveller's robe,
   To hear the welcome creaking of its bars.

Val.
   Ah! art thou wounded then? Alas! alas!
   Art thou too of our company? sad trav'llers
   Unto a world unknown!

Othus.
   Nay, say not sad, though to a world unknown.
   The foster'd nursling, at th' appointed season,
   Who leaves his narrow crib and cottage-home
   For the fair mansion of his lordly sire,
   Goes to a world unknown.

Val.
   Ay, thou wouldst cheer me, and I will be cheer'd.
   There reigns above who casts His dark shade o'er us,
   Mantling us on our way to glorious light.
   I have offended, and I should be fearful,
   But there is sent in mercy to my heart,
   For which I humbly give—O no, I may not!
   Death is upon me now.—Ella and Lucia:
   Stand closer to me: let me firmly grasp
   Something that I have loved!

 Catching hold of them with a convulsive grasp.


 
   It will soon cease:
   Farewell unto you all!
 Dies.

 A solemn pause, all standing round and gazing upon the body.


Othus.
   And this is the last form that we do wear,
   Unto the sad and solemn gaze of those
   Who have beheld us in our days of joy.
   Honour and deepest rev'rence be to thee,
   Thou honour'd dead!


 Bowing respectfully to the body.
Mah.
   Great God of heav'n! was this a woman's spirit
   That took its flight?

Rod.
   Let ev'ry proudest worship be upon her,
   For she is number'd with the gallant dead!
   Not in the trophied field, nor sculptured dome;
   No, nor beneath the dark and billowy deep
   Lies one, o'er whom the valiant living would
   With truer zeal their lofty banners wave,
   Or bid the deep-mouth'd cannon nobly tell
   How brave men mourn the brave.
   How is it, Othus? something in thine eye
   Of joyous sadness looks upon me wistfully.


 To Othus , who takes him tenderly by the hand.
Othus.
   Dost thou not guess?—But I would speak to thee
   Of a brave soldier, who, in one short moment
   Of nature's weakness, has a wound received
   That will unto his life as fatal prove
   As fellest foeman's thrust: who in his rest
   Will not be mourn'd as brave men mourn the brave.
   Justiniani in his cave of shame—

Rod.
   And therein let him perish!
   He hath disgraced a soldier's honest fame:
   He hath disgraced the country of his birth:
   He hath—It makes me stamp upon the ground
   To think that one, who grasp'd with brother's hand
   The noble Constantine, should basely turn.
   Name not his cursed name!

Othus.
   Art thou so stern? In a lone cave he groans,
   On the damp earth, in deepest agony
   Of the soul's shrewdest sufferings. I have
   By an old soldier been advised of this,
   And I would go to him, but that I feel
   I needs must go where a more powerful call
   Doth summon me.

Rod.

 softened .
   Ah! must thou then so soon, my gen'rous Othus!
   Must thou so soon? Well, ask whate'er thou wilt:
   I give my chafed passion to the winds.
   Ah! goest thou? Do I the last remain
   Of those who loved the noble Constantine?
   The last of a brave band? Alas! alas!


 Embracing Othus tenderly.
Osmir

 to Mahomet , who strides up and down in gloomy agitation .
   Most mighty Mahomet, what thus disturbs you?
   May not your slave in humble zeal be told?

Mah.
   Away! away! thy humble zeal I know;
   Yea, and the humble zeal of such as thou art.
   The willing service of a brave man's heart,
   That precious pearl, upon the earth exists,
   But I have found it not.

 Turning to Othus and Rodrigo.
   Ye valiant men who have so served your prince,
   There still is in the world a mighty monarch,
   Who, if he might retain you near his throne,
   Shall he say near his heart, in such dear zeal?
   Would think his greatness honour'd.

Othus.
   Great Sultan, thou hast conquer'd with such arms
   As power has given to thee, th' imperial city
   Of royal Constantine; but other arms,
   That might the friends of Constantine subdue,
   Heav'n has denied thee.

Rod.
   No, mighty prince; they who have served for love
   Cannot like flying pennons be transferr'd
   From bark to bark.

Mah.

 impatiently .
   I understand you well, and you are free.
   My arms, such as they are, of heav'n are bless'd;
   That is enough.

Othus.
   That were indeed enough; but heaven ofttimes
   Success bestows where blessing is denied.
   A secret spirit whispers to my heart,
   That in these walls your weaken'd wretched race,
   Slaves of their slaves, in gloomy prison'd pomp,
   Shall shed each other's blood, and make these towers
   A place of groans and anguish, not of bliss:
   And think not when the good and valiant perish
   By worldly power o'erwhelm'd, that heav'n's high favour
   Shines not on them.—Oh, no! then shines it most.
   For then in them it shows th' approving world
   The worth of its best work.
   And from their fate a glorious lesson springs;
   A lesson of such high ennobling power;
   Connecting us with such exalted things
   As all do feel, but none with such true force,
   Such joy, such triumph, as a dying man.


 Falling back into the arms of Rodrigo.


THE FAMILY LEGEND: A TRAGEDY, IN FIVE ACTS.
TO WALTER SCOTT, ESQ., WHOSE FRIENDLY ZEAL ENCOURAGED ME TO OFFER IT TO THE NOTICE OF MY INDULGENT COUNTRYMEN. I INSCRIBE THIS PLAY.

 

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA MEN Maclean , chief of the clan of that name.

Earl of Argyll.

John of Lorne , son to Argyll.

Sir Hubert de Grey , friend to Lorne.

Benlora , the kinsmen and chief vassals of Maclean.

Lochtarish , the kinsmen and chief vassals of Maclean.

Glenfadden , the kinsmen and chief vassals of Maclean.

Morton.

Dugald.

Piper, fishermen, vassals, &c.

WOMEN Helen , daughter of Argyll , and wife of Maclean.

Rosa.

Fisherman's wife.



Scene in the Island of Mull, and the opposite coast, &c., and afterwards in Argyll 's castle.


 
ACT I. SCENE I.
Before the gate of Maclean 's castle, in the Isle of Mull: several Highlanders discovered crossing the stage, carrying loads of fuel; whilst Benlora is seen on one side, in the background, pacing to and fro, and frequently stopping and muttering to himself.
 st high.
   This heavy load, I hope, will be the last:
   My back is almost broken.

 d high.
                                            Sure am I,
   Were all the beeves in Mull slain for the feast,
   Fuel enough already has been stow'd
   To roast them all: and must we still with burdens
   Our weary shoulders gall?


Enter Morton.
Mor.
                                            Ye lazy lubbards!
   Grumble ye thus?—Ye would prefer, I trow,
   To sun your easy sides, like household curs,
   Each on his dung-hill stretch'd, in drowsy sloth.
   Fy on't! to grumble on a day like this,
   When to the clan a rousing feast is giv'n,
   In honour of an heir born to the chief—
   A brave Maclean, still to maintain the honours
   Of this your ancient race!

 st high.
   A brave Maclean indeed!—vile mongrel hound!
   Come from the south, where all strange mixtures be
   Of base and feeble! sprung of varlet's blood!
   What is our race to thee?

 d high.

 to Morton .
   Thou'lt chew, I doubt not,
   Thy morsel in the hall with right good relish,
   Whether Maclean or Campbell be our lord.

Morton.
   Ungracious surly lubbards! in, I say,
   And bring your burdens quicker. And, besides,
   Where are the heath and hare-bells, from the glen,
   To deck my lady's chamber?

 d high.
   To deck my lady's chamber!

Morton.
                                            Heartless hounds!
   Is she not kind and gentle? spares she aught
   Her gen'rous stores afford, when you or yours
   Are sick, or lack relief? Hoards she in chests,
   When shipwreck'd strangers shiver on our coast,
   Or robe or costly mantle?—All comes forth!
   And when the piercing shriek of drowning mariners
   Breaks through the night, up-starting from her couch,
   To snatch, with eager haste, the flaming torch,
   And from the tower give notice of relief,
   Who comes so swiftly as her noble self?
   And yet ye grumble.

 st high.
                                            Ay, we needs must own,
   That, were she not a Campbell, fit she were
   To be a queen, or e'en the thing she is—
   Our very chieftain's dame. But, in these towers,
   The daughter of Argyll to be our lady!

Morton.
   Out! mountain savages! is this your spite?
   Go to!

 d high.
                                            Speakst thou to us? thou Lowland loon!
   Thou wand'ring pedlar's son, or base mechanic!
   Com'st thou to lord it here o'er brave Macleans?
   We'll carry loads at leisure, or forbear,
   As suits our fancy best, nor wait thy bidding.
 Exeunt highlanders grumbling, and followed by Morton.

 Manet Benlora , who now comes forward, and after remaining some time on the front of the stage, wrapt in thought, not observing Lochtarish , who enters behind him.

   Heigh ho! heigh ho, the day!

Loch.
   How so? What makes Benlora sigh so deeply?

Ben.

 turning round .
   And does Lochtarish ask? Full well thou knowst,
   The battles of our clan I've boldly fought,
   And well maintain'd its honour.

Loch.
                                            Yes, we know it.

Ben.
   Who dared, unpunish'd, a Maclean to injure?
   Yea; he who dared but with a scornful lip
   Our name insult, I thought it feeble vengeance
   If steed or beast within his walls were left,
   Or of his holds one tower unruin'd stood.

Loch.
   Ay; who dared then to brave us?

Ben.
   Thus dealt Benlora e'en with common foes;
   But in the warfare of our deadly feud,
   When rang the earth beneath our bloody strife,
   And brave Macleans brave Campbells boldly fronted,
    Fiends as they are, I still must call them brave ,
   What sword more deeply drank the hated blood
   Than this which now I grasp—but idly grasp!

Loch.
   There's ne'er a man of us that knows it not,
   That swears not by thy valour.

Ben.
   Until that fatal day, by ambush ta'en,
   And in a dungeon kept, where, two long years,
   Nor light of day, nor human voice e'er cheer'd
   My loneliness, when did I ever yield,
   To e'en the bravest of that hateful name,
   One step of ground upon the embattled field—
   One step of honour in the banner'd hall?

Loch.
   Indeed thou hast our noble champion been;
   Deserving well the trust our chief deceased,
   This chieftain's father, did to thee consign.
   But when thou wast a captive, none to head us,
   But he, our youthful lord, yet green in arms,
   We fought not like Macleans; or else our foe,
   By fiends assisted, fought with fiend-like power,
   Far—far beyond the Campbells' wonted pitch.
   E'en so it did befal:—we lost the day:—
   That fatal day!—Then came this shameful peace.

Ben.
   Ay, and this wedding; when, in form of honour


 
   Conferr'd upon us, Helen of Argyll
   Our sov'reign dame was made,—a bosom worm,
   Nursed in that viper's nest, to infuse its venom
   Through all our after race.
                                            This is my welcome!
   From dungeons freed, to find my once-loved home
   With such vile change disgraced; to me more hateful
   Than thraldom's murkiest den. But to be loosen'd
   From captive's chains to find my hands thus bound!

Loch.
   It is, indeed, a vile and irksome peace.

Ben.
   Peace, say they! who will bonds of friendship sign
   Between the teeming ocean's finny broods,
   And say, “Sport these upon the hither waves,
   And leave to those that farther billowy reach?”
   A Campbell here to queen it o'er our heads,
   The potent dame o'er quell'd and beaten men,
   Rousing or soothing us, as proud Argyll
   Shall send her secret counsel!—hold, my heart!
   This, base degen'rate men!—this, call ye peace?
   Forgive my weakness: with dry eyes I laid
   My mother in her grave, but now my cheeks
   Are, like a child's, with scalding drops disgraced.

Loch.
   What I shall look upon, ere in the dust
   My weary head be laid to rest, heav'n knows,
   Since I have lived to see Benlora weep.

Ben.
   One thing, at least, thou ne'er shalt live to see—
   Benlora crouching, where he has commanded.
   Go ye, who will, and crowd the chieftain's hall,
   And deal the feast, and nod your grizzled heads
   To martial pibrochs, play'd, in better days,
   To those who conquer'd, not who woo'd their foes;
   My soul abhors it. On the sea-beaten rock,
   Remov'd from ev'ry form and sound of man;
   In proud communion with the fitful winds
   Which speak, with many tongues, the fancied words
   Of those who long in silent dust have slept;
   While eagles scream, and sullen surges roar—
   The boding sounds of ill;—I'll hold my feast,—
   My moody revelry.

Loch.
                                            Nay, why so fierce?
   Thinkst thou we are a tame and mongrel pack?
   Dogs of true breed we are, though for a time
   Our master-hound forsakes us. Rouse him forth
   The noble chace to lead: his deep-toned yell
   Full well we know; and for the opening sport
   Pant keenly.

Ben.
                                            Ha! is there amongst you still
   Spirit enough for this?

Loch.
   Yes, when good opportunity shall favour.
   Of this, my friend, I'll speak to thee more fully
   When time shall better serve.
                                            Maclean, thou knowst,
   Is of a soft, unsteady, yielding nature;
   And this, too well, the crafty Campbell knew,
   When to our isle he sent this wily witch
   To mould, and govern, and besot his wits,
   As suits his crafty ends. I know the youth:
   This dame or we must hold his will in thraldom:
   Which of the two,—But softly: steps approach.
   Of this again.

Ben.
                                            As early as thou wilt.

Loch.
   Then be it so: some staunch determined spirits
   This night in Irka's rocky cavern meet;
   There must thou join us. Wear thou here the while
   A brow less cloudy, suited to the times.
Enter Glenfadden.

   See, here comes one who wears a merry face;
   Yet, ne'ertheless, a clan's-man staunch he is,
   Who hates a Campbell, worse than Ilcom's monks
   The horned fiend.

Ben.
                        Ha! does he so?

 Turning graciously to Glenfadden.
                                            Glenfadden!
   How goes it with thee?—Joyous days are these—
   These days of peace.

Glen.
                                            These days of foul disgrace!
   Com'st thou to cheer the piper in our hall,
   And goblets quaff to the young chieftain's health,
   From proud Argyll descended?

Ben.

 smiling grimly .
                                            Yes, Glenfadden,
   If ye will have it so; not else.

Glen.
                                            Thy hand—
   Thy noble hand!—thou art Benlora still.

 Shaking Benlora warmly by the hand, and then turning to Lochtarish.
   Know ye that banish'd Allen is return'd—
   Allen of Dura?

Loch.
                                            No; I knew it not.
   But in good time he comes. A daring knave!
   He will be useful.

 After considering.
                                            Of Maclean we'll crave
   His banishment to cancel; marking well
   How he receives it. This will serve to show
   The present bent and bearing of his mind.

 After considering again.
   Were it not also well, that to our council
   He were invited, at a later hour,
   When of our purpose we shall be assured?

Glen.
   Methinks it were.

Loch.
                                            In, then; now is our time.

Ben.
   I'll follow thee when I awhile have paced
   Yon lonely path, and thought upon thy counsel.


 Exeunt Lochtarish and Glenfadden into the castle, and Benlora by the opposite side.
SCENE II.
An apartment in the castle.

Enter Morton and Rosa , speaking as they enter.
Rosa.
   Speak with my lady privately?

Mor.
                                            Ay, please you:


 
   Something I have to say, regards her nearly.
   And though I doubt not, madam, your attachment—

Rosa.
   Good Morton, no apology: thy caution
   Is prudent; trust me not till thou hast proved me.
   But oh! watch o'er thy lady with an eye
   Of keen and guarded zeal! she is surrounded—

 Looking round the room.
   Does no one hear us?—O those baleful looks
   That, from beneath dark surly brows, by stealth,
   Are darted on her by those stern Macleans!
   Ay; and the gestures of those fearful men,
   As on the shore in savage groups they meet,
   Sending their loosen'd tartans to the wind,
   And tossing high their brawny arms where oft
   In vehement discourse, I have, of late,
   At distance mark'd them. Yes; thou shakest thy head:
   Thou hast observed them too.

Mor.
   I have observed them oft. That calm Lochtarish,
   Calm as he is, the growing rancour fosters:
   For, fail the offspring of their chief, his sons
   Next in succession are. He hath his ends,
   For which he stirs their ancient hatred up;
   And all too well his dev'lish pains succeed.

Rosa.
   Too well indeed! The very bed-rid crones
   To whom my lady sends, with kindly care,
   Her cheering cordials,—couldst thou have believed it?
   Do mutter spells to fence from things unholy,
   And grumble, in a hollow smother'd voice,
   The name of Campbell, as unwillingly
   They stretch their wither'd hands to take her bounty.
   The wizards are in pay to rouse their fears
   With dismal tales of future ills foreseen,
   From Campbell and Maclean together join'd,
   In hateful union.—E'en the very children,
   Sporting the heath among, when they discover
   A loathsome toad or adder on their path,
   Crush it with stones, and, grinding wickedly
   Their teeth, in puny spite, call it a Campbell.
   Benlora, too, that savage gloomy man—

Morton.
   Ay, evil is the day that brings him back,
   Unjustly by a Campbell hath he been,
   The peaceful treaty of the clans unheeded,
   In thraldom kept; from which but now escaped,
   He like a furious tiger is enchafed,
   And thinks Argyll was privy to the wrong
   His vassal put upon him. Well I know
   His bloody vengeful nature: and Maclean,
   Weak and unsteady, moved by ev'ry counsel,
   Brave in the field, but still in purpose timid,
   Ofttimes the instrument in wicked hands
   Of wrongs he would abhor,—alas, I fear,
   Will ill defend the lovely spouse he swore
   To love and cherish.

Rosa.
                                            Heavy steps approach:
   Hush! see who comes upon us!—sly Lochtarish,
   And his dark colleagues.—Wherefore come they hither?


 Morton retires to the bottom of the stage, and enter Lochtarish, Benlora , and Glenfadden.
Loch.
   We thought, fair maid, to find the chieftain here.

Rosa.
   He is in these apartments.

Loch.
                                            Would it greatly
   Annoy your gentleness to tell his honour,
   We wait to speak with him upon affairs
   Of much concernment?

Rosa.
   My service is not wanted; to your wish,
   See, there he comes unwarn'd, and with him too
   His noble lady.


 Retiring to the bottom of the stage.
Loch.
   Ha! there they come! see how he hangs upon her
   With boyish fondness!

Glen.
                                            Ah, the goodly creature!
   How fair she is! how winning!—See that form;
   Those limbs beneath their foldy vestments moving,
   As though in mountain clouds they robed were,
   And music of the air their motion measured.

Loch.
   Ay, shrewd and crafty earl! 'tis not for nought
   Thou hither sent'st this jewel of thy race.
   A host of Campbells, each a chosen man,
   Could not enthral us, as, too soon I fear,
   This single Campbell will. Shrewd crafty foe!

Ben.
   Hell lend me aid, if heaven deny its grace,
   But I will thwart him, crafty though he be!

Loch.
   But now for your petition: see we now
   How he receives your suit.


Enter Maclean and Helen.
Ben.

 eyeing her attentively as she enters .
   A potent foe it is: ay, by my faith,
   A fair and goodly creature!

Mac.
   Again, good morrow to you, gallant kinsmen:
   Come ye to say I can with any favour
   The right good liking prove, and high regard
   I bear to you, who are my chiefest strength,—
   The pillars of my clan?

Ben.
   Yes, we are come, Maclean, a boon to beg.

Loch.
   A boon that, granted, will yourself enrich.

Mac.
   Myself enrich?

Loch.
                                            Yes; thereby wilt thou be
   One gallant man the richer. Hear us out.
   Allen of Dura, from his banishment—

Mac.
   False reiver! name him not.—Is he return'd?
   Dares he again set foot upon this isle?

Ben.
   Yes, chief; upon this isle set foot he hath:
   And on nor isle nor mainland doth there step
   A braver man than he.—Lady, forgive me:
   The boldest Campbell never saw his back.

Hel.
   Nay, good Benlora, ask not my forgiveness:


 
   I love to hear thee praise, with honest warmth,
   The valiant of thy name, which now is mine.

Ben.

 aside .
   Ha! good Benlora!—this is queenly pride.

 Aloud. 
   Madam, you honour us.

Helen.
   If so, small thanks be to my courtesy,
   Sharing myself with pride the honest fame
   Of every brave Maclean.—I'll henceforth keep
   A proud account of all my gallant friends:
   And every valiant Campbell therein noted,
   On the opposing leaf, in letters fair,
   Shall with a brave Maclean be proudly match'd.


 Benlora and Glenfadden bow in silence.
Loch.
   Madam, our grateful duty waits upon you.

 Aside to Benlora. 
   What thinkst thou of her, friend?

Ben.

 aside to Lochtarish .
   What think I of her?
   Incomparable hypocrite!

Loch.

 aloud .
   But to our suit: for words of courtesy
   It must not be forgotten.—Chief, vouchsafe:
   Benlora here, who from his loathly prison,
   Which for your sake two years he hath endured,
   Begs earnestly this grace for him we mention'd,
   Allen of Dura.

 Aside to Benlora.
                                            Kneel, man; be more pressing.

Ben.

 aside to Lochtarish .
   Nay, by my fay! if crouching pleases thee,
   Do it thyself.

 Going up proudly to Maclean.
   Maclean; thy father put into these hands
   The government and guidance of thy nonage.
   How I the trust fulfill'd, this castle strengthen'd
   With walls and added towers, and stored, besides,
   With arms and trophies in rough warfare won
   From even the bravest of our western clans,
   Will testify. What I in recompense
   Have for my service earn'd, these galled wrists

 Pushing up the sleeve from his arm.
   Do also testify.—Such as I am,
   For an old friend I plainly beg this grace:
   Say if my boon be granted or denied.

Mac.
   The man for whom thou pleadst is most unworthy;
   Yet let him safely from my shores depart:
   I harm him not.

Ben.

 turning from him indignantly .
   My suit is then denied.

 To Lochtarish and Glenfadden.
   Go ye to Dura's Allen; near the shore
   He harbours in his aged mother's cot;
   Bid him upon the ocean drift again
   His shatter'd boat, and be a wanderer still.

Helen

 coming forward eagerly .
   His aged mother!

 To Maclean. 
   Oh! and shall he go?
   No, no, he shall not! On this day of joy,
   Wilt thou to me refuse it?

 Hanging upon him with looks of entreaty, till, seeing him relent, she then turns joyfully to Benlora.
                                            Bid your wanderer
   Safe with his aged mother still remain,—
   A banish'd man no more.

Mac.
   This is not well: but be it as thou wilt;
   Thou hast prevail'd, my Helen.

Loch. and Glen.

 bowing low .
   We thank thee, lady.


 Benlora bows slightly, in sullen silence.
Mac.

 to Benlora .
   Then let thy friend remain; he has my pardon.

 Benlora bows again in silence.
   Clear up thy brow, Benlora; he is pardon'd.

 Pauses, but Benlora is still silent.
   We trust to meet you shortly in the hall;
   And there, my friends, shall think our happy feast
   More happy for your presence.

 Going up again, with anxious courtesy, to Benlora.
                                            Thy past services,
   Which great and many are, my brave Benlora,
   Shall be remember'd well. Thou hast my honour,
   And high regard.

Helen.
   And mine to boot, good kinsman, if the value
   You put upon them makes them worth the having.

Ben.

 bows sullenly and retires; then muttering aside to himself as he goes out .
   Good kinsman! good Benlora! gracious words
   From this most high and potent dame, vouchsafed
   To one so poor and humble as myself.


 Exit.
Loch.

 aside to Glenfadden .
   But thou forgettest—

Glen.

 aside to Lochtarish .
                                            No; I'll stay behind,
   And move Maclean to join our nightly meeting.
   Midnight the hour when you desire his presence?

Loch.
   Yes, even so; then will we be prepared.


 Exit.
Glen.

 returning to Maclean .
   Chieftain, I would some words of privacy
   Speak with you, should your leisure now permit.

Mac.
   Come to my closet, then, I'll hear thee gladly.


 Exeunt Maclean and Glenfadden.
Helen

 to Rosa , who now comes forward .
   Where hast thou been, my Rosa, with my boy,
   Have they with wild flowers deck'd his cradle round?
   And peeps he through them like a little nestling—
   A little heath-cock broken from its shell,
   That through the bloom puts forth its tender beak,
   As steals some rustling footstep on its nest?
   Come, let me go and look upon him. Soon,
   Ere two months more go by, he'll look again
   In answer to my looks, as though he knew
   The wistful face that looks so oft upon him,
   And smiles so dearly, is his mother's.
                                            Thinkst thou
   He'll soon give heed and notice to my love?



 
Rosa.
   I doubt it not: he is a lively infant,
   And moves his little limbs with vigour, spreading
   His fingers forth, as if in time they would
   A good claymore clench bravely.

Helen.
   A good claymore clench bravely!—O! to see him
   A man!—a valiant youth!—a noble chieftain!
   And laying on his plaided shoulder, thus,
   A mother's hand, say proudly, “This is mine!”
   I shall not then a lonely stranger be
   'Mid those who bless me not: I shall not then—
   But silent be my tongue.


 Weeps.
Rosa.
   Dear madam, still in hope look forward cheerly.

 Morton comes from the bottom of the stage.
   And here is Morton, with some tidings for you:
   God grant they comfort you!—I must withdraw:
   His wary faithfulness mistrusts my love,
   But I am not offended.


 Offering to retire.
Helen.
   Nay, remain.

 Beckoning her back.
   Say what thou hast to say, my worthy Morton,
   For Rosa is as faithful as thyself.

Mor.
   This morning, lady, 'mongst the farther cliffs,
   Dress'd like a fisher peasant, did I see
   The Lord of Lorne, your brother.

Helen.
                                            Ha! sayst thou,
   The Lord of Lorne, my brother?—Thou'rt deceived.

Morton.
   No, no: in vain his sordid garb concealed him!
   His noble form and stately step I knew
   Before he spoke.

Helen.
                        He spoke to thee?

Morton.
                                            He did.

Helen.
   Was he alone?

Morton.
                                            He was; but, near at hand,
   Another stranger, noble as himself,
   And in like garb disguised, amongst the rocks
   I mark'd, though he advanced not.

Helen.
   Alas, alas, my brother! why is this?
   He spoke to thee, thou sayst—I mean my brother:
   What did he say?

Morton.
                                            He earnestly entreats
   To see you privately; and bids you say
   When this may be. Meantime he lies conceal'd
   Where I may call him forth at your command.

Helen.
   O, why disguised?—Thinkst thou he is not safe?

Morton.
   Safe in his hiding-place he is: but yet
   The sooner he shall leave this coast, the better.

Helen.
   To see him thus! O, how I am beset!
   Tell him at twilight, in my nurse's chamber,
   I will receive him. But be sure thou add,
   Himself alone will I receive—alone—
   With no companion must he come. Forget not
   To say, that I entreat it earnestly.

Morton.
                                            I will remember this.

Helen.
   Go to him quickly then: and, till the hour,
   Still do thou hover near him. Watch his haunt,
   Lest some rude fisherman or surly hind
   Surprise him. Go thou quickly. O, be prudent!
   And be not for a moment off the watch.

Morton.
   Madam, I will obey you: trust me well.


 Exit.
Helen

 much disturbed .
   My brother on the coast; and with him too,
   As well I guess, the man I must not see!

Rosa.
   Mean you the brave Sir Hubert?

Helen.
                                            Yes, my Rosa.
   My noble brother in his powerful self
   So strong in virtue stands, he thinks full surely
   The daughter of his sire no weakness hath;
   And wists not how a simple heart must struggle
   To be what it would be—what it must be—
   Ay, and so aid me, heaven! what it shall be.

Rosa.
   And heaven will aid you, madam, doubt it not.
   Though on this subject still you have repress'd
   All communing, yet, ne'ertheless, I well
   Have mark'd your noble striving, and revered
   Your silent inward warfare, bravely held;
   In this more pressing combat firm and valiant,
   As is your noble brother in the field.

Helen.
   I thank thee, gentle Rosa; thou art kind—
   I should be franker with thee; but I know not—
   Something restrains me here.

 Laying her hand on her heart.
   I love and trust thee;
   And on thy breast I'll weep when I am sad;
   But ask not why I weep.


 Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
An apartment in twilight, almost dark; the door of an inner chamber, standing a little ajar, at the bottom of the stage.

Enter John of Lorne and Sir Hubert de Grey , disguised as peasants.
De Grey.
   Nay, stop, I pray; advance we not too far?

Lorne.
   Morton hath bid us in this place to wait.
   The nurse's chamber is adjoining to it;
   And, till her light within give notice, here
   Thou mayst remain; when I am call'd, thou'lt leave me.

De Grey.
   Till thou art call'd! and may I stay to hear
   The sweetness of her voice—her footstep's sound;
   Perhaps snatch in the torch's hasty light
   One momentary vision of that form—
   The form that hath to me of earthly make
   No fellow? May it be without transgression?

Lorne.
   Why shouldst thou not? De Grey, thou art too fearful;


 
   Here art thou come with no dishonest will;
   And well she knows thine honour. Her commands,
   Though we must yield to them, capricious seem;
   Seeing thou art with me, too nicely scrupulous;
   And therefore need no farther be obey'd
   Than needs must be. She puts thee not on honour.
   Were I so used—

De Grey.
                                            'Spite of thy pride, wouldst thou
   Revere her still the more.—O, no, brave Lorne,
   I blame her not. When she, a willing victim,
   To spare the blood of two contending clans,
   Against my faithful love her suffrage gave,
   I bless'd her; and the deep, but chasten'd sorrow
   With which she bade me—Oh! that word! farewell,
   Is treasured in my bosom as its share
   Of all that earthly love hath power to give.
   It came from Helen, and, from her received,
   Shall not be worn with thankless dull repining.

Lorne.
   A noble heart thou hast: such manly meekness
   Becomes thy gen'rous nature. But for me,
   More fierce and wilful, sorely was I chafed
   To see thy faithful heart robb'd of its hope,
   All for the propping up a hollow peace
   Between two warlike clans, who will, as long
   As bagpipes sound, and blades flash to the sun,
   Delighting in the noble sport of war,
   Some fierce opponents find. What doth it boot,
   If men in fields must fight, and blood be shed,
   What clans are in the ceaseless strife opposed?

De Grey.
   Ah, John of Lorne! too keenly is thy soul
   To war inclined—to wasteful, ruthless war.

Lorne.
   The warlike minstrel's rousing lay thou lov'st:
   Shall bards i' the hall sing of our fathers' deeds
   To lull their sons to sleep? Vain simple wish!
   I love to hear the sound of holy bell,
   And peaceful men their praises lift to heaven:
   I love to see around their blazing fire
   The peasant and his cheerful family set,
   Eating their fearless meal. But, when the roar
   Of battle rises, and the closing clans,
   Dark'ning the sun-gleam'd heath, in dread affray
   Are mingled; blade with blade, and limb with limb,
   Nerve-strain'd, in terrible strength; yea, soul with soul
   Nobly contending; who would raise aloft
   The interdicting hand, and say, “Be still'd?”
   If this in me be sin, may heaven forgive me!
   That being am not I.

De Grey.
                                            In very deed
   This is thy sin; and of thy manly nature
   The only blemish worthy of that name.
   More peaceful be, and thou wilt be more noble.

Lorne.
   Well, here we will not wrangle for the point.
   None in th'embattled field who have beheld
   Hubert de Grey in mailed hauberk fight,
   Will guess how much that knight in peace delights.
   Still burns my heart that such a man as thou
   Wast for this weak, unsteady, poor Maclean—

De Grey.
   Nay, with contempt, I pray thee, name him not.
   Her husband, and despised! O, no, no, no!
   All that pertains to her, e'en from that hour,
   Honour'd and sacred is.

Lorne.
   Thou gen'rous heart! more noble than myself!
   I will not grieve thee.—I'll to Helen go,
   With every look and word that might betray
   Indignant thoughts, or wound her gentle spirit,
   Strictly suppress'd: and to her ear will give
   Thy gen'rous greetings, and thy manly words
   Of cheering comfort;—all most faithfully
   Shall be remember'd.

De Grey.
                                            Ay, and my request.

Lorne.
   To see the child?

De Grey.
                                            E'en so: to look upon it;—
   Upon the thing that is of her; this bud—
   This seedling of a flower so exquisite.

 Light is seen in the inner chamber.
   Ha! light is in the chamber! moves the door?
   Some one approaches. O! but for a moment
   Let me behind thy friendly tartans be,
   And snatch one glance of what that light will give.

 Conceals himself behind Lorne , who steps some paces back, setting his hand to his side, and tilting his plaid over his arms to favour him; while the door of the inner chamber opens, and Helen appears, bearing a lamp, which she afterwards sets upon a stone slab as she advances.
   Her form—her motion—yea, that mantled arm,
   Press'd closely to her breast, as she was wont
   When chilly winds assail'd.—The face—O, woe is me!
   It was not then so pale.

Lorne

 to him, in a low voice .
   Begone: begone.

De Grey.
   Blest vision, I have seen thee! Fare thee well!


 Exit in haste.
Helen

 coming forward, alarmed .
   What sound is that of steps that hasten from us?
   Is Morton on the watch.

Lorne.
   Fear nothing; faithful Morton is at hand:
   The steps thou heardst were friendly.

Helen

 embracing Lorne .
   My brother! meet we thus,—disguised, by stealth?
   Is this like peace? How is my noble father?
   Hath any ill befallen?

Lorne.
                                            Argyll is well;
   And nothing ill, my sister, hath befallen,
   If thou art well and happy.

Helen.
                                            Speakst thou truly?
   Why art thou come? Why thus upon our coast?
   O take it not unkindly that I say,
   “Why art thou come?”



 
Lorne.
   Near to the opposite shore,
   With no design, but on a lengthen'd chase,
   A lusty deer pursuing from the hills
   Of Morven, where Sir Hubert and myself
   Guests of the social lord two days had been,
   We found us; when a sudden strong desire
   To look upon the castle of Maclean,
   Seen from the coast, our eager fancy seized,
   And that indulged, forthwith we did agree
   The frith to cross, and to its chief and dame
   A hasty visit make. But as our boat
   Lay waiting to receive us, warn'd by one
   Whom well I knew the vassal of a friend
   Whose word I could not doubt, that jealous rancour,
   Stirr'd up amongst the vassals of Maclean,
   Who, in their savage fury, had been heard
   To utter threats against thy innocent self,
   Made it unsafe in open guise to venture,
   Here in this garb we are to learn in secret
   The state in which thou art.—How is it then?
   Morton's report has added to my fears:
   All is not well with thee.

Helen.
                                            No, all is well.

Lorne.
   A cold constrained voice that answer gave:
   All is not well.—Maclean—dares he neglect thee?

Helen.
   Nay, wrong him not; kind and affectionate
   He still remains.

Lorne.
   But it is said, his vassals with vile names
   Have dared to name thee, even in open clan:
   And have remain'd unpunish'd. Is it so?

 Pauses for an answer, but she is silent.
   All is not well.

Helen.
                                            Have I not said it is?

Lorne.
   Ah! dost thou thus return a brother's love
   With cold reserve?—O speak to me, my Helen!
   Speak as a sister should.—Have they insulted thee?
   Has any wrong—my heart within me burns
   If I but think upon it.—Answer truly.

Helen.
   What, am I question'd then? Thinkst thou to find me
   Like the spoil'd heiress of some Lowland lord,
   Peevish and dainty; who, with scorn regarding
   The ruder home she is by marriage placed in,
   Still holds herself an alien from its interest,
   With poor repining, losing every sense
   Of what she is, in what she has been? No.—
   I love thee, Lorne; I love my father's house:
   The meanest cur that round his threshold barks
   Is in my memory as some kindred thing:
   Yet take it not unkindly when I say,
   The lady of Maclean no grievance hath
   To tell the Lord of Lorne.

Lorne.
                                            And has the vow,
   Constrain'd, unblest, and joyless as it was,
   Which gave thee to a lord unworthy of thee,
   Placed thee beyond the reach of kindred ties—
   The warmth of blood to blood—the sure affection
   That nature gives to all—a brother's love?
   No, by all sacred things! here is thy hold:
   Here is thy true, unshaken, native stay:
   One that shall fail thee never, though the while,
   A faithless, wavering, intervening band
   Seems to divide thee from it.


 Grasping her hand vehemently, as if he would lead her away.
Helen.
   What dost thou mean? What violent grasp is this?
   Com'st thou to lead me from my husband's house,
   Beneath the shade of night, with culprit stealth?

Lorne.
   No, daughter of Argyll; when John of Lorne
   Shall come to lead thee from these hated walls
   Back to thy native home,—with culprit stealth,
   Beneath the shades of night, it shall not be.
   With half our western warriors at his back,
   He'll proudly come. Thy listening timid chief
   Shall hear our martial steps upon his heath,
   With heavy measured fall, send, beat by beat,
   From the far-smitten earth, a sullen sound,
   Like deep-dell'd forests groaning to the strokes
   Of lusty woodmen. On the watch-tower's height,
   His straining eye shall mark our sheathless swords
   From rank to rank their lengthen'd blaze emit,
   Like streams of shiv'ring light, in hasty change,
   Upon the northern firmament.—By stealth!
   No! not by stealth!—believe me, not by stealth
   Shalt thou these portals pass.

Helen.
                                            Them have I enter'd,
   The pledge of peace: and here my place I'll hold
   As dame and mistress of the warlike clan
   Who yield obedience to their chief, my lord;
   And whatsoe'er their will to me may bear,
   Of good or ill, so will I hold me ever.
   Yea, did the Lord of Lorne, dear as he is,
   With all the warlike Campbells at his back
   Here hostile entrance threaten; on these walls,
   Failing the strength that might defend them better,
   I would myself, while by my side in arms
   One valiant clan's-man stood, against his powers,
   To the last push, with desp'rate opposition,
   This castle hold.

Lorne.
   And wouldst thou so? so firm and valiant art thou?
   Forgive me, noble creature!—Oh! the fate—
   The wayward fate that binds thy gen'rous soul
   To poor unsteady weakness!

Helen.
                                            Speakst thou thus?
   Thus pressing still upon the galled spot?
   Thou dealst unkindly with me. Yes, my brother,
   Unkindly and unwisely. Wherefore hast thou
   Brought to this coast the man thou knowest well
   I ought not in mysterious guise to see?
   And he himself—seeks he again to move


 
   The hapless weakness I have striv'n to conquer?
   I thought him generous.

Lorne.
                                            So think him still.
   His wishes tend not to disturb thy peace:
   Far other are his thoughts.—He bids me tell thee
   To cheer thy gentle heart, nor think of him,
   As one who will in vain and stubborn grief
   His ruin'd bliss lament,—he bids me say
   That he will even strive, if it be possible,
   Amongst the maidens of his land to seek
   Some faint resemblance of the good he lost,
   That thou mayst hear of him with less regret,
   As one by holy bands link'd to his kind.
   He bids me say, should ever child of his
   And child of thine—but here his quivering lip
   And starting tears spoke what he could not speak.

Helen.
   O noble, gen'rous heart; and does he offer
   Such cheering manly comfort? Heaven protect,
   And guide, and bless him! On his noble head
   Such prosp'rous bliss be pour'd, that hearing of it
   Shall, through the gloom of my untoward state,
   Like gleams of sunshine break, that from afar
   Look o'er the dull dun heath.

Lorne.
                                            But one request—

Helen.
   Ha! makes he one?

Lorne.
                                            It is to see thy child.

Helen.
   To see my child! Will he indeed regard it?
   Shall it be bless'd by him?


Enter Morton in haste.
Morton.
   Conceal yourself, my lord, or by this passage

 Pointing off the stage.
   The nearest postern gain: I hear the sound
   Of heavy steps at hand, and voices stern.

Helen.
   O fly, my brother! Morton will conduct thee.

 To Morton. 
   Where is Sir Hubert?

Morton.
                                            Safe he is without.

Helen.
   Heaven keep him so!

 To Lorne. 
                                            O leave me! I, the while,
   Will in, and, with mine infant in mine arms,
   Meet thee again, ere thou depart.—Fly! fly!


 Exeunt ; Helen into the inner chamber, putting out the lamp as she goes, and Lorne and Morton by a side passage.
SCENE II.
A cave, lighted by flaming brands fixed aloft on its rugged sides, and shedding a fierce glaring light down upon the objects below. Lochtarish, Benlora, Glenfadden , with several of the chief vassals of Maclean , are discovered in a recess, formed by projecting rocks, at the bottom of the stage, engaged in earnest discourse, from which they move forward slowly, speaking as they advance.
Loch.
   And thus ye see, by strong necessity,
   We are compell'd to this.

 st vas.
                                            Perhaps thou'rt right.

Loch.
   Sayst thou perhaps? Dost thou not plainly see
   That ne'er a man amongst us can securely
   His lands possess, or say, “My house is mine,”
   While, under tutorage of proud Argyll,
   This beauteous sorceress our besotted chief
   By soft enchantment holds?

 Laying his hand on the  st vassal.
                                            My brave Glenore,
   What are thy good deserts, that may uphold thee
   In favour with a Campbell?—Duncan's blood,
   Slain in his boat, with all its dashing oars
   Skirting our shore, while that his vaunting piper
   The Campbell's triumph play'd? Will this speak for thee?

 Turning to  d vassal.
   And, Thona, what good merit pleadest thou?
   The coal-black steed of Clone, thy moonlight plunder,
   Ta'en from the spiteful laird, will he, good sooth!
   Neigh favour on thee?

 To  d vassal.
                                            And my valiant Fallen,
   Bethink thee well if fair-hair'd Flora's cries
   Whom from her native bower by force thou tookst,
   Will plead for thee.—And say ye still perhaps —
   Perhaps there is necessity?

 st vas.
   Strong should it be, Lochtarish; for the act
   Is fell and cruel thou wouldst push us to.

Glen.

 to  st vas. 
   Ha, man of mercy! are thy lily hands
   From bloody taint unstain'd? What sights were those
   Thou look'dst upon in Brunock's burning tower,
   When infants through the flames their wailings sent,
   And yet unaided perish'd?

Loch.

 soothingly .
                                            Tush, Glenfadden!
   Too hasty art thou.

 To the vassals. 
                                            Ye will say, belike,
   “Our safety—our existence did demand
   Utter extinction of that hold of foes.”
   And well ye may.—A like necessity
   Compels us now, and yet ye hesitate.

Glen.
   Our sighted seers the fun'ral lights have seen,
   Not moving onward in the wonted path
   On which by friends the peaceful dead are borne,
   But hov'ring o'er the heath like countless stars,
   Spent and extinguish'd on the very spot
   Where first they twinkled. This too well foreshows
   Interment of the slain, whose bloody graves
   Of the same mould are made on which they fell.

 d vas.
   Ha! so indeed! some awful tempest gathers.

 st vas.
   What sighted man hath seen it?

Glen.
                                            He whose eye
   Can see on northern waves the found'ring bark,
   With all her shrieking crew, sink to the deep,
   While yet, with gentle winds, on dimpling surge
   She sails from port in all her gallant trim:
   John of the Isle hath seen it.



 
Omnes

 starting back .
   Then hangs some evil over us.

Glen.
                                            Know ye not
   The mermaid hath been heard upon our rocks?

Omnes

 still more alarmed .
   Ha! when?

Glen.
   Last night, upon the rugged crag
   That lifts its dark head through the cloudy smoke
   Of dashing billows, near the western cliff.
   Sweetly, but sadly, o'er the stilly deep
   The passing sound was borne. I need not say
   How fatal to our clan that boding sound
   Hath ever been.

 d vas.
   In faith thou makest me quake.

 d vas.
   Some fearful thing hangs o'er us.

 st vas.
                                            If 'tis fated
   Our clan before our ancient foe shall fall,
   Can we heav'n's will prevent? Why should we then
   The Campbells' wrath provoke?

Ben.

 stepping up fiercely to  st vassal .
   Heav'n's will prevent—the Campbells' ire provoke!
   Is such base tameness utter'd by the son
   Of one, who would into the fiery pit
   Of damned fiends have leapt, so that his grasp
   Might pull a Campbell with him?
                                            Bastard blood!
   Thy father spoke not thus.

Loch.

 soothingly .
                                            Nay, brave Benlora,
   He means not as thou thinkst.

Ben.
                                            If heaven decree
   Slaughter and ruin for us, come it then!
   But let our enemies, close grappled to us,
   In deadly strife, their ruin join with ours.
   Let corse to corse, upon the bloody heath,
   Maclean and Campbell, stiff'ning side by side,
   With all the gnashing ecstasy of hate
   Upon their ghastly visages impress'd,
   Lie horribly!—For ev'ry widow's tear
   Shed in our clan, let matron Campbells howl!

Loch.
   Indeed, my friends, although too much in ire,
   Benlora wisely speaks.—Shall we in truth
   Wait for our ruin from a crafty foe,
   Who here maintains this keenly watchful spy
   In gentle kindness masked?

Glen.
                                            Nor need we fear,
   As good Lochtarish hath already urged,
   Her death will rouse Argyll. It will be deem'd,
   As we shall grace it with all good respect
   Of funeral pomp, a natural visitation.

Loch.
   Ay, and besides, we'll swear upon the book,
   And truly swear, if we are call'd upon,
   We have not shed her blood.

Ben.
                                            I like not this.
   If ye her life will take, in open day
   Let her a public sacrifice be made.
   Let the loud trumpet far and near proclaim
   Our bloody feast, and at the rousing sound,
   Let every clans-man of the hated name
   His vengeful weapon clench.—
   I like it not, Lochtarish. What we do,
   Let it be boldly done.—Why should we slay her?
   Let her in shame be from the castle sent;
   Which, to her haughty sire, will do, I ween,
   Far more despite than taking of her life.—
   A feeble woman's life!—I like it not.


 Turning on his heel angrily, and striding to the bottom of the stage.
Loch.

 aside to Glen. 
   Go to him, friend, and soothe him to our purpose.
   The fiery fool! how madly wild he is!


 Glenfadden goes to the bottom of the stage, and is seen remonstrating, in dumb-show, with Benlora , while Lochtarish speaks to the vassals on the front.
Loch.
   My friends, why on each other look ye thus
   In gloomy silence? freely speak your thoughts.
   Mine have I freely spoken: that advising
   Which for the good—nay, I must say existence,
   Of this our ancient clan most needful is.
   When did Lochtarish ever for himself
   A separate 'vantage seek, in which the clan
   At large partook not? Am I doubted now?

 d vas.
   No, nothing do we doubt thy public zeal.

Loch.
   Then is my long experience o' the sudden
   To childish folly turn'd?
                                            Thinkst thou, good Thona,
   We should beneath this artful mistress live,
   Hush'd in deceitful peace, till John of Lorne,
   For whom the office of a treacherous spy
   She doth right slily manage, with his powers
   Shall come upon us? Once ye would have spurn'd
   At thoughts so base; but now, when forth I stand
   To do what vengeance, safety, nay, existence,
   All loudly call for; even as though already
   The enemy's baleful influence hung o'er you,
   Like quell'd and passive men ye silent stand.

 st vas.

 roused .
   Nay, cease, Loctarish! quell'd and passive men
   Thou knowst we are not.

Loch.
                                            Yet a woman's life,
   And that a treacherous woman, moves you thus.
   Bold as your threats of dark revenge have been,
   A strong decisive deed appals you now.
   Our chieftain's feeble undetermined spirit
   Infects you all: ye dare not stand by me.

Omnes.
   We dare not, sayst thou?

Loch.
                                            Dare not, will I say!
   Well spoke the jeering Camerons, I trow,
   As past their fishing boats our vessel steer'd,
   When with push'd lip, and finger pointing thus,
   They call'd our crew the Campbell-cow'd Macleans.

Omnes

 roused fiercely .
   The Campbell-cow'd Macleans!

 d vas.
                                            Infernal devils!
   Dare they to call us so?

Loch.
                                            Ay, by my truth!


 
   Nor think that from the Camerons alone
   Ye will such greeting have, if back ye shrink,
   And stand not by me now.

Omnes

 eagerly .
   We'll stand!—We'll stand!

 d vas.
   Tempt us not more. There's ne'er a man of us
   That will not back thee boldly.

Loch.
                                            Ay, indeed?
   Now are ye men! Give me your hands to this.

 They all give him their hands.
   Now am I satisfied.

 Looking off the stage.
                                            The chief approaches.
   Ye'know full well the spirit of the man
   That we must deal withal; therefore be bold.

Omnes.
   Mistrust us not.


Enter Maclean , who advances to the middle of the stage, while Lochtarish, Benlora, Glenfadden , and all the other vassals gather round him with stern determined looks. A pause ; Maclean eyeing them all round with inquisitive anxiety.
Mac.
   A goodly meeting at this hour convened.

 A sullen pause.
   Benlora; Thona; Allen of Glenore;
   And all of you, our first and bravest kinsmen;
   What mystery in this sullen silence is?
   Hangs any threaten'd evil o'er the clan?

Ben.
   Yes, chieftain; evil, that doth make the blood
   Within your grey-hair'd warriors' veins to burn,
   And their brogued feet to spurn the ground that bears them.

Loch.
   Evil, that soon will wrap your tower in flames,
   Your ditches fill with blood, and carrion birds
   Glut with the butcher'd corses of your slain.

Glen.
   Ay; evil, that doth make the hoary locks
   Of sighted men around their age-worn scalps
   Like quicken'd points of crackling flame to rise;
   Their teeth to grind, and strained eye-balls roll
   In fitful frenzy, at the horrid things,
   In terrible array before them raised.

 st vas.
   The mermaid hath been heard upon our rocks:
   The fatal song of waves.

Glen.
                                            The northern deep
   Is heard with distant moanings from our coast,
   Uttering the dismal bodeful sounds of death.

 d vas.
   The funeral lights have shone upon our heath,
   Marking in countless groups the graves of thousands.

Ben.
   Yea, chief; and sounds like to thy father's voice
   Have from the sacred mould wherein he lies,
   At dead of night, by wakeful men been heard
   Three times distinctly.

 Turning to Glenfadden.
   Saidst thou not thrice?

Glen.
   Yes; three times heard distinctly.

Mac.
   Ye much amaze me, friends.—Such things have been?

Loch.
   Yea, chief; and thinkst thou we may lightly deem
   Of coming ills, by signs like these forewarn'd?

Mac.
   Then an it be, high heav'n have mercy on us!

Loch.

 in a loud solemn voice .
   Thyself have mercy on us!

Mac.
                                            How is this?
   Your words confuse and stun me.—Have I power
   To ward this evil off?

Omnes.
                                            Thou hast! thou hast!

Mac.
   Then God to me show mercy in my need,
   As I will do for you and for my clan
   Whate'er my slender power enables me.

Omnes.
   Amen! and swear to it.

Mac.

 starting back .
   What words are these,
   With such wild fierceness utter'd? name the thing
   That ye would have me do.

Ben.

 stepping out from the rest .
                                            Ay, we will name it.
   Helen the Campbell, foster'd in your bosom,
   A serpent is, who wears a hidden sting
   For thee and all thy name; the oath-bound spy
   Of dark Argyll, our foe; the baleful plague
   To which ill-omen'd sounds and warnings point,
   As that on which existence or extinction—
   The name and being of our clan depend;—
   A witch of deep seduction.—Cast her forth.
   The strange, unnatural union of two bloods,
   Adverse and hostile, most abhorred is.
   The heart of every warrior of your name
   Rises against it. Yea, the grave calls out,
   And says it may not be.—Nay, shrink not, chief,
   When I again repeat it,—cast her off.

Mac.
   Art thou a man? and bidst me cast her off,
   Bound as I am by sacred holy ties?

Loch.
   Bound as thou art by that which thou regardest
   As sacred holy ties; what tie so sacred
   As those that to his name and kindred vassals
   The noble chieftain bind? If ties there be
   To these opposed, although a saint from heav'n
   Had bless'd them o'er the cross'd and holy things,
   They are annull'd and broken.

Ben.
                                            Ay, Lochtarish;
   Sound doctrine hast thou utter'd. Such the creed
   Of ancient warriors was, and such the creed
   That we their sons will with our swords maintain.


 Drawing his sword fiercely, whilst the rest follow his example.
Mac.
   Ye much confound me with your violent words.
   I can in battle strive, as well ye know:
   But how to strive with you, ye violent men,
   My spirit knows not.

Loch.
   Decide—decide, Maclean: the choice is thine
   To be our chieftain, leading forth thy bands,


 
   As heretofore thy valiant father did,
   Against our ancient foe, or be the husband,
   Despised, forsaken, cursed, of her thou prizest
   More than thy clan and kindred.

Glen.
                                            Make thy choice.
   Benlora, wont in better times to lead us
   Against the Campbells, with a chieftain's power,
   Shall, with the first blast of his warlike horn,
   If so he will it, round his standard gather
   Thy roused and valiant vassals to a man.

Mac.

 greatly startled .
   Ha! go your thoughts to this? Desert me so?
   My vassals so desert me?

Loch.
   Ay, by my faith, our very women too:
   And in your hall remain, to serve your state,
   Nor child nor aged crone.

Mac.

 after great agitation .
   Decide, and cast her off!—How far the thoughts
   To which these words ye yoke may go, I guess not.

 Eagerly. 
   They reach not to her life?

 Pauses and looks at them anxiously, but they are silent.
   Oh, oh! oh, oh! that stern and dreadful silence!

Loch.
   We will not shed her blood.

Mac.
                                            Then ye will spare her?

Loch.
   Commit her to our keeping: ask us not
   How we shall deal with her.

Mac.
   Some fearful mystery is in your words,
   Which covers cruel things. O woe the day,
   That I on this astounding ridge am poised!
   On every side a fearful ruin yawns.

 A voice heard without, uttering wild incoherent words, mixed with shrieks of horror.
   What frenzied voice is that?


Enter th vassal, as if terribly frightened.
Loch.

 to th vas. 
   What brings thee hither?

 th vas.
   He fixes wildly on the gloomy void
   His starting eyeballs, bent on fearful sights,
   That make the sinews of his aged limbs
   In agony to quiver.

Loch.
                                            Who didst thou say?

 th vas.
   John of the Isle, the sighted awful man.
   Go, see yourselves: i' the outer cave he is.
   Entranced he stands; arrested on his way
   By horrid visions, as he hurried hither
   Enquiring for the chief.


 Voice heard without, as before.
Loch.
   Hark! hark, again! dread powers are dealing with him.
   Come, chieftain—come and see the awful man.
   If heaven or hell hath power to move thy will,
   Thou canst not now withstand us.

 Pausing for him to go. 
   Hearst thou not?
   And motionless?

Mac.
                                            I am beset and stunn'd,
   And every sense bewilder'd. Violent men!
   If ye unto this fearful pitch are bent,—
   When such necessity is press'd upon me,
   What doth avail resistance? Woe the day!
   Even lead me where ye will.


 Exit Maclean , exhausted and trembling, leaning on Lochtarish , and followed by Benlora and Glenfadden and vassals; two inferior vassals alone left upon the stage.
 st vas.

 looking after Maclean .
   Ay, there he goes; so spent, and scared, and feeble!
   Without a prophet's skill, we may foretell,
   John of the Isle, by sly Lochtarish taught,
   Will work him soon to be an oath-bound wretch
   To this their fell design.—Are all things ready?

 d vas.
   All is in readiness.

 st vas.
                                            When ebbs the tide?

 d vas.
   At early dawn, when in the narrow creek
   Near to the castle, with our trusty mates,
   Our boat must be in waiting to receive her.

 st vas.
   The time so soon! alas, so young and fair!
   That slow and dismal death! To be at once
   Plunged in the closing deep many have suffer'd,
   But to sit waiting on a lonely rock
   For the approaching tide to throttle her—
   But that she is a Campbell, I could weep.

 d vas.
   Weep, fool! think soon how we'll to war again
   With our old enemy; and, in the field,
   Our good claymores die with their hated blood:
   Think upon this, and change thy tears to joy.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
The bed-chamber of Maclean.

Enter Maclean , followed by Helen.
Helen.
   Ah! wherefore art thou so disturb'd? the night
   Is almost spent: the morn will break ere long,
   And rest hast thou had none. Go to thy bed:
   I pray thee, go.

Mac.
                                            I cannot: urge me not.

Helen.
   Nay, try to rest: I'll sit and watch by thee.

Mac.
   Thou'lt sit and watch! O woe betide the hour!
   And who will watch for thee?

Helen.
                                            And why for me?
   Can any harm approach? When thou art near,
   Or sleeping or awake, I am secure.

Mac.

 pacing to and fro distractedly .
                                            O God! O God!

Helen.
   Those exclamations!

 Going up to him, while he avoids her.
                                            Turnst thou from me thus?
   Have I offended? dost thou doubt my faith?
   Hath any jealous thought—I freely own
   Love did not make me thine: but, being thine,
   To no love-wedded dame, bound in the ties


 
   Of dearest sympathy, will I in duty—
   In steady, willing, cheerful duty yield.
   Yea, and though here no thrilling rapture be,
   I look to spend with thee, by habit foster'd,
   The evening of my days in true affection.

Mac.
   The evening of thy days! alas, alas!
   Would heaven had so decreed it!

 Pulling away his hand from hers.
   Grasp me not!
   It is a fiend thou clingst to.

 A knock at the door.
   Power of heaven!
   Are they already at the chamber door!

Helen.
   Are those who knock without unwelcome?—hush!
   Withdraw thyself, and I will open to them.


 Goes to the door.
Mac.
   O go not! go not!


 Runs after her to draw her back, when a vassal, rushing from behind the bed, lays hold of him.
Vas.
   Art thou not sworn to us? Where is thy faith?

Mac.
   I know, I know! the bands of hell have bound me.
   O fiends! ye've made of me—what words can speak
   The hateful wretch I am!
                                            Hark! hark! she cries!
   She shrieks and calls on me!


 Helen 's cries heard without, first near and distinct, afterwards more and more distant as they bear her away; while the vassal leads Maclean forcibly off the stage by the opposite side, he breaks from him, and hastens towards that by which Helen went out.
Vas.
   Thou art too strong for me. Do as thou wilt;
   But if thou bringst her back, even from that moment
   Benlora is our leader, and thyself,
   The Campbell's husband, chieftain and Maclean
   No more shalt be. We've sworn as well as thou.


 Maclean stops irresolutely, and then suffers the vassal to lead him off by the opposite side.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A small island, composed of a rugged craggy rock, on the front of the stage, and the sea in the background.

Enter two vassals dragging in Helen , as if just come out of their boat.
Helen.
   O why is this? Speak, gloomy, ruthless men!
   Our voyage ends not here?

 st vas.
                                            It does: and now,
   Helen the Campbell, fare thee— fare there well!

 d vas.
   Helen the Campbell, thy last greeting take
   From mortal thing.

Helen.
                                            What! leave me on this rock,
   This sea-girt rock, to solitude and famine?

 st vas.
   Next rising tide will bring a sure relief
   To all the ills we leave thee.

Helen

 starting .
                                            I understand you.

 Raising her clasped hands to heaven.
   Lord of heaven and earth;
   Of storms and tempests, and th' unfathom'd deep;
   Is this thy righteous will?

 Grasping the hands of the men imploringly
   Ye cannot mean it!
                                            Ye cannot leave a human creature thus
   To perish by a slow approaching end,
   So awful and so terrible! Instant death
   Were merciful to this.

 st vas.
   If thou prefer it, we can shorten well
   Thy term of pain and terror: from this crag,
   Full fourteen fathom deep thou mayst be plunged.
   In shorter time than three strokes of an oar
   Thy pains will cease.

 d vas.
                                            Come, that were better for thee.


 Both of them take her hands, and are going to hurry her to the brink of the rock, when she shrinks back.
Helen.
   O no! the soul recoils from swift destruction!
   Pause ye awhile.

 Considering for a moment.
                                            The downward terrible plunge!
   The coil of whelming waves!—O fearful nature!

 Catching hold of a part of the rock near her.
   To the rough rock I'll cling: it still is something
   Of firm and desp'rate hold—Depart and leave me.


 Waving her hand for the vassals to go, whilst she keeps close hold of the rock with the other.
 st vas.
   Thou still mayst live within a prison pent,
   If life be dear to thee.

Helen

 eagerly .
   If life be dear!—Alas, it is not dear!
   Although the passing fearful act of death
   So very fearful is.—Say how, even in a prison,
   I still may wait my quiet natural end.

 st vas.
   Whate'er thou art, such has thy conduct been,
   Thy wedded faith, e'en with thy fellest foes,
   Sure and undoubted stands:—Sign thou this scroll,
   Owning the child, thy son, of bastard birth;
   And this made sure, Lochtarish bade me say
   Thy life shall yet be spared.

Helen

 pushing him away with indignation as he offers her the scroll .
   Off, off, vile agent of a wretch so devilish!
   Now do I see from whence my ruin comes:
   I and my infant foil his wicked hopes.


 
   O harmless babe! will heav'n abandon thee?
   It will not!—No; it will not!

 Assuming firmness and dignity.
   Depart and leave me. In my rising breast
   I feel returning strength. Heav'n aids my weakness:
   I'll meet its awful will.


 Waving them off with her hand.
 st vas.
   Well, in its keeping rest thee: fare thee well,
   Helen the Campbell!

 d vas.
                                            Be thy suff'rings short!

 Aside to the other. 
   Come, quickly let us go, nor look behind.
   Fell is the service we are put upon:
   Would we had never ta'en that cruel oath!


 Exeunt vassals.
Helen

 alone, after standing some time gazing round her, paces backwards and forwards with agitated steps, then, stopping suddenly, bends her ear to the ground as if she listened earnestly to something .
   It is the sound; the heaving hollow swell
   That notes the turning tide.—Tremendous agent!
   Mine executioner, that, step by step,
   Advances to the awful work of death.—
   Onward it wears: a little space removed
   The dreadful conflict is.

 Raising her eyes to heaven, and moving her lips, as in the act of devotion, before she again speaks aloud.
   Thou art i' the blue coped sky—th' expanse immeasurable;
   I' the dark roll'd clouds, the thunder's awful home:
   Thou art i' the wide-shored earth,—the pathless desert;
   And in the dread immensity of waters,—
   I' the fathomless deep Thou art.
   Awful but excellent! beneath Thy hand,
   With trembling confidence, I bow me low,
   And wait Thy will in peace.

 Sits down on a crag of the rock, with her arms crossed over her breast in silent resignation; then, after a pause of some length, raises her head hastily.
   Is it a sound of voices in the wind?
   The breeze is on the rock: a gleam of sunshine
   Breaks through those farther clouds. It is like hope
   Upon a hopeless state.

 Starting up, and gazing eagerly around her.
   I'll to that highest crag and take my stand:
   Some little speck upon the distant wave
   May to my eager gaze a vessel grow—
   Some onward wearing thing,—some boat—some raft—
   Some drifted plank.—O hope! thou quitt'st us never!


 Exit, disappearing amongst the rugged divisions of the rock.
SCENE II.
A small island, from which the former is seen in the distance, like a little pointed rock standing out of the sea.

Enter Sir Hubert de Grey , followed by two fishermen.
De Grey.
   This little swarded spot, that o'er the waves,
   Cloth'd in its green light, seem'd to beckon to us,
   Right pleasant is: until our comrades join,
   Here will we rest. I marvel much they stand
   So far behind. In truth, such lusty rowers
   Put shame upon their skill.

 st fish.
   A cross-set current bore them from the track,
   But see, they now bear on us rapidly.

 Voices without. 
                                            Holla!

 d fish.
   They call to us.—Holla! holla!
   How fast they wear! they are at hand already.

De Grey.
   Right glad I am: the Lord of Lorne, I fear,
   Will wait impatiently: he has already
   With rapid oars the nearer mainland gain'd,
   Where he appointed us to join him.—Ho!

 Calling off the stage.
   Make to that point, my lads.

 To those near him. 
   Here, for a little while, upon the turf
   We'll snatch a hasty meal, and, so refresh'd,
   Take to our boats again.
Enter three other Fishermen, as from their boat, on the other side of the stage.

   Well met, my friends! I'm glad you're here at last.
   How was it that you took that distant track?

 d fish.
   The current bore us wide of what we wist;
   And, were it not your honour is impatient
   Mainland to make, we had not come so soon.

De Grey.
   What had detain'd you?

 d fish.
   As near you rock we bore, that o'er the waves
   Just shows its jetty point, and will, ere long,
   Beneath the tide be hidd'n, we heard the sound
   Of feeble lamentation.

De Grey.
                                            A human voice?

 d fish.
   I cannot think it was;
   For on that rock, sea-girt, and at high tide
   Sea-cover'd, human thing there cannot be;
   Though, at the first, it sounded in our ears
   Like a faint woman's voice.

De Grey.
                                            Perceived ye aught?

 d fish.
   Yes; something white that moved, and, as we think,
   Some wounded bird that there hath dropp'd its wing,
   And cannot make its way.



 
 th fish.
                                            Perhaps some dog,
   Whose master, at low water, there hath been,
   And left him.

 d fish.
                                            Something 'tis in woeful case,
   Whate'er it be. Right fain I would have gone
   To bear it off.

De Grey

 eagerly .
                                            And wherefore didst thou not?
   Return and save it. Be it what it may;
   Something it is, lone and in jeopardy,
   Which hath a feeling of its desperate state,
   And therefore doth to woe-worn, fearful man,
   A kindred nature bear.—Return, good friend:—
   Quickly return and save it, ere the tide
   Shall wash it from its hold. I to the coast
   Will steer the while, and wait your coming there.

 d fish.
   Right gladly, noble sir.

 th fish.
                                            We'll gladly go:
   For, by my faith! at night I had not slept
   For thinking of that sound.

De Grey.
   Heaven speed you then! whate'er ye bring to me
   Of living kind, I will reward you for it.
   Our different tracks we hold; nor longer here
   Will I remain. Soon may we meet:
   God speed you!


 Exeunt severally.
SCENE III.
A fisherman's house on the mainland.

Enter John of Lorne and Sir Hubert de Grey.
Lorne.
   Then wait thou for thy boat; I and my men
   Will onward to the town, where, as I hope,
   My trusty vassals and our steeds are station'd.
   But lose not time.

De Grey.
                                            Fear not; I'll follow quickly.

Lorne.
   I must unto the castle of Argyll
   Without delay proceed; therefore, whate'er
   Of living kind, bird, beast, or creeping thing,
   This boat of thine produces, bring it with thee;
   And, were it eaglet fierce, or wolf, or fox,
   On with us shall it travel, mounted bravely,
   Our homeward cavalcade to grace. Farewell!

De Grey.
   Farewell, my friend! I shall not long delay
   Thy homeward journey.

Lorne

 calling off the stage .
   But ho! good host and hostess!
 To De Grey. 
Ere I go
   I must take leave of honest Duncan here,
   And of his rosy wife.—Ay, here they come.
Enter the host and his wife.


 To host, &c. 
   Farewell, my friends, and thanks be to you both!
   Good cheer, and kindly given, of you we've had.
   Thy hand, good host. May all the fish o' th' ocean
   Come crowding to thy nets!—And healthy brats,
   Fair dame, have thou! with such round rosy cheeks
   As brats of thine befit: and, by your leave,

 Kissing her.
   So be they kiss'd by all kind comers too!
   Good luck betide you both!

Host.
   And, sir, to you the same. Whoe'er you be,
   A brave man art thou, that I will be sworn.

Wife.
   Come you this way again, I hope, good sir,
   You will not pass our door.

Lorne.
                                            Fear not, good hostess;
   It is a pleasant, sunny, open door,
   And bids me enter of its own accord;
   I cannot pass it by.—Good luck betide you!


 Exit, followed to the door by Sir Hubert.
Host.
   I will be sworn it is some noble chieftain,
   Though homely be his garb.

Wife.
   Ay, so will I: the Lord of Lorne himself
   Could not more courteous be.

Host.
                                            Hush! hush! be quiet!
   We live not now amongst the Campbells, wife.
   Should some Maclean o'erhear thee—hush, I say.

 Eyeing De Grey , who returns from the door.
   And this man, too; right noble is his mien;
   He is no common rambler.

 To De Grey. 
                                            By your leave,
   If I may be so bold without offending,
   Your speech, methinks, smacks of a southern race;
   I guess at least of Lowland kin ye be.
   But think no shame of this; we'll ne'ertheless
   Regard thee: thieves and cowards be not all
   Who from the Lowlands come.

Wife.
   No; no, in sooth! I knew a Lowlander,
   Some years gone by, who was as true and honest—
   Ay, and I do believe well nigh as brave,
   As though, with brogued feet, he never else
   Had all his days than muir or mountain trodd'n.

De Grey.
   Thanks for your gentle thoughts!—It has indeed
   Been my misluck to draw my earliest breath
   Where meadows flower, and corn fields wave i' th' sun.
   But let us still be friends! Heaven gives us not
   To choose our birth-place, else these wilds, no doubt,
   Would be more thickly peopled.

Host.
   Ay, true it is, indeed.

Wife.
                                            And hard it were
   To quarrel with him too for his misfortune.


 Noise heard without.
De Grey.
   Ha! 'tis my boat return'd.


Enter  st Fisherman.
 st fish.
                                            Ay, here we are.

De Grey.
   And aught saved from the rock?

 st fish.
   Yes, by my faith! but neither bird nor beast.
   Look there, my master.


 Pointing to the door.


 

Enter Helen , extremely exhausted, and almost senseless, wrapped closely up in one of their plaids, and supported by the other two Fishermen.
De Grey.
   A woman! Heaven in mercy! was it then
   A human creature there exposed to perish?

 st fish.

 opening the plaid to show her face .
   Ay, look; and such a creature!

De Grey

 starting back .
   Helen of Argyll!
   O God! was this the feeble wailing voice?

 Clasping his arms about her knees, as she stands almost senseless, supported by the fishermen, and bursting into tears.
   Could heart of man so leave thee? thou, of all
   That lovely is, most lovely.—Woe is me!
   Some aid, I pray you.

 To host and his wife.
                                            Bear her softly in,
   And wrap warm garments round her. Breathes she freely?
   Her eyes half open are, but life, alas!
   Is almost spent, and holds within her breast
   A weak uncertain seat.

 Helen moves her hand.
                                            She moves her hand:—
   She knows my voice.—O heaven, in mercy save her!
   Bear her more gently, pray you:—Softly, softly!
   How weak and spent she is!

 st fish.
   No marvel she is weak: we reach'd her not
   Until the swelling waters laved her girdle.
   And then to see her—

De Grey.
                                            Cease, I pray thee, friend,
   And tell me not—

 d fish.
                                            Nay, faith, he tells you true:
   She stood above the water, with stretched arms
   Clung to the dripping rock, like the white pinions—

De Grey.
   Peace, peace, I say! thy words are agony:—
   Give to my mind no image of the thing!


 Exeunt, bearing Helen into an inner part of the house.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
A small Gothic hall, or ante-room, in Argyll 's castle, a door at the bottom of the stage, leading to the apartment of the earl, before which is discovered the piper pacing backwards and forwards, playing on his bagpipe.

Enter Dugald.
Dugald.
   Now, pray thee, piper, cease! That stunning din
   Might do good service by the ears to set
   Two angry clans; but for a morning's rouse,
   Here at an old man's door, it does, good sooth,
   Exceed all reasonable use. The Earl
   Has pass'd a sleepless night: I pray thee now
   Give o'er, and spare thy pains.

Piper.
   And spare my pains, sayst thou? I'll do mine office,
   As long as breath within my body is.

Dug.
   Then mercy on us all! if wind thou meanst,
   There is within that sturdy trunk of thine,
   Old as it is, a still exhaustless store.
   A Lapland witch's bag could scarcely match it.
   Thou couldst, I doubt not, belly out the sails
   Of a three-masted vessel with thy mouth:
   But be thy mercy equal to thy might!
   I pray thee now give o'er: in faith the earl
   Has pass'd a sleepless night.

Piper.
   Thinkst thou I am a Lowland, day-hired minstrel,
   To play or stop at bidding? Is Argyll
   The lord and chieftain of our ancient clan,
   More certainly, than I to him, as such,
   The high hereditary piper am?
   A sleepless night, forsooth! He's slept full oft
   On the hard heath, with fifty harness'd steeds
   Champing their fodder round him;—soundly too.
   I'll do mine office, loon, chafe as thou wilt.


 Continuing to pace up and down, and play as before.
Dugald.
   Nay, thou the chafer art, red-crested cock!
   The Lord of Lorne has spoilt thee with indulging
   Thy wilful humours. Cease thy cursed din!
   See; here the earl himself comes forth to chide thee.


 Exit.

Enter Argyll , attended, from the chamber.
Arg.
   Good morrow, piper! thou hast roused me bravely:
   A younger man might gird his tartans on
   With lightsome heart to martial sounds like these,
   But I am old.

Piper.
                                            O no, my noble chieftain!
   It is not age subdues you.

Arg.
                                            No; what else?

Piper.
   Alack! the flower and blossom of your house
   The wind hath blown away to other towers.
   When she was here, and gladsome faces brighten'd
   With looking on her, and around your board
   Sweet lays were sung, and gallants in the hall
   Footed it trimly to our varied measures,
   There might, indeed, be found beneath your roof
   Those who might reckon years fourscore and odds,
   But of old folks, I warrant, ne'er a soul.
   No; we were all young then.

Arg.

 sighing deeply .
                                            'Tis true, indeed,
   It was even as thou sayst. Our earthly joys
   Fly like the blossoms scatter'd by the wind.



 

Enter a Servant.
Serv.
   Please you, my lord,
   Some score of vassals in the hall attend
   To bid good morrow to you, and the hour
   Wears late: the chamberlain hath bid me say
   He will dismiss them, if it please your honour.

Arg.
   Nay, many a mile have some of them, I know,
   With suit or purpose lurking in their minds,
   Ridd'n o'er rough paths to see me; disappointed
   Shall none of them return. I'm better now.
   I have been rather weary than unwell.
   Say, I will see them presently.


 Exit servant.

Re-enter Dugald in haste.

 To Dugald. 
   Thou comest with a busy face: what tidings?
Dugald.
   The Lord of Lorne's arrived, an' please your honour:
   Sir Hubert too, and all their jolly train;
   And with them have they brought a lady, closely
   In hood and mantle muffled: ne'er a glimpse
   May of her face be seen.

Arg.
                                            A lady, sayst thou?

Dugald.
   Yes; closely muffled up.

Arg.

 pacing up and down, somewhat disturbed .
   I like not this.—It cannot surely be—

 Stopping short, and looking hard at Dugald.
   Whence comes he?

Dugald.
                                            He a-hunting went, I know,
   To Cromack's ancient laird, whose youthful dame
   So famed for beauty is; but whence he comes,
   I cannot tell, my lord.

Arg.

 pacing up and down, as he speaks to himself in broken sentences, very much disturbed .
   To Cromack's ancient laird!—If that indeed—
   Beshrew me, if it be!—I'd rather lose
   Half of my lands, than son of mine such wrong,
   Such shameful wrong, should do. This sword I've drawn
   Like robbery to revenge, ne'er to abet it:
   And shall I now with hoary locks—No, no!—
   My noble Lorne! he cannot be so base.


Enter Lorne , going up to Argyll with agitation.
Arg.

 eyeing him suspiciously .
   Well, John, how is it? Welcome art thou home,}
   If thou returnst, as well I would believe,
   Deserving of a welcome.

Lorne.
                                            Doubts my lord
   That I am so return'd?

 Aside to Argyll , endeavouring to draw him apart from his attendants.
                                            Your ear, my father.
   Let these withdraw: I have a thing to tell you.

Arg.

 looking still more suspiciously upon Lorne , from seeing the eagerness and agitation with which he speaks, and turning from him indignantly .
   No, by this honest blade! if wrong thou'st done,
   Thou hast no shelter here. In open day,
   Before th' assembled vassals shalt thou tell it;
   And he whom thou hast injured be redress'd,
   While I have power to bid my Campbells fight
   I' the fair and honour'd cause.

Lorne.
                                            I pray, my lord—
   Will you vouchsafe to hear me?

Arg.
                                            Thoughtless boy!
   How far unlike the noble Lorne I thought thee!—
   Proud as I am, far rather would I see thee
   Join'd to the daughter of my meanest vassal,
   Than see thy manly, noble worth engaged
   In such foul raid as this.

Lorne.
                                            Nay, nay! be pacified!
   I'd rather take, in faith, the tawny hand
   Of homeliest maid, that doth, o' holidays,
   Her sun-burnt locks with worsted ribbon bind,
   Fairly and freely won, than brightest dame
   That e'er in stately bower or regal hall
   In graceful beauty shone, gain'd by such wrong—
   By such base treachery as you have glanced at.
   These are plain words: then treat me like a man,
   Who hath been wont the manly truth to speak.

Arg.
   Ha! now thy countenance and tone again
   Are John of Lorne's. That look, and whispering voice,
   So strange appear'd, in truth I liked it not.
   Give me thy hand.—Where is the stranger dame?
   If she in trouble be—

Lorne

 aside .
                                            Make these withdraw,
   And I will lead her hither.


 Exit, while the earl waves his hand, and Dugald and attendants, &c. go out: presently re-enter Lorne , leading in Helen , covered closely up in a mantle.
Lorne.
   This is the dame, who, houseless and deserted,
   Seeks shelter here, nor fears to be rejected.

Helen

 sinking down, and clasping Argyll 's knees .
   My father!

Arg.
   That voice!—O God!—unveil—unveil, for mercy!

 Tearing off the mantle that conceals her.
   My child! my Helen!

 Clasping her to his heart, and holding her there for some time, unable to speak.
   My child! my dearest child!—my soul! my pride!
   Deserted!—houseless!—com'st thou to me thus?
   Here is thy house—thy home: this aged bosom
   Thy shelter is, which thou shalt quit no more.
   My child! my child!

 Embracing her again ; Helen and he weeping upon one another's necks.
   Houseless! deserted—'neath the cope of heaven
   Breathes there a wretch who could desert thee?—Speak,
   If he hath so abused his precious trust,


 
   If he—it makes me tear these hoary locks
   To think what I have done!—Oh thoughtless father!
   Thoughtless and selfish too!


 Tearing his hair, beating his forehead with all the violent gestures of rage and grief.
Helen.
   Oh, oh! forbear! It was not you, my father;
   I gave myself away: I did it willingly:
   We acted both for good; and now your love
   Repays me richly—stands to me instead
   Of many blessings.—Noble Lorne, besides—
   O, he hath been to me so kind—so tender!

 Taking her brother's hand, and pressing it to her breast; then joining her father's to it, and pressing them both ardently to her lips.
   Say not I am deserted: heaven hath chid me—
   Hath chid me sorely: but hath bless'd me too,—
   O, dearly bless'd me!

Arg.
   Hath chid thee sorely!—how I burn to hear it!
   What hast thou suffer'd?

Lorne.
   We will not tell thee now. Go to thy chamber,
   And be awhile composed. We have, my father,
   A tale to tell that will demand of thee
   Recruited strength to hear.—We'll follow thee.


 Exeunt ; Lorne supporting his father and Helen into the chamber.
SCENE II.
The garden of the castle.

Enter Argyll, Lorne , and Sir Hubert de Grey , speaking as they enter.
Lorne.
   A month!—A week or two!—No, not an hour
   Would I suspend our vengeance. Such atrocity
   Makes e'en the little term between our summons,
   And the dark crowding round our martial pipes
   Of plumed bonnets nodding to the wind,
   Most tedious seem; yea, makes the impatient foot
   To smite the very earth beneath its tread,
   For being fix'd and inert.

Arg.
   Be less impatient, John: thou canst not doubt
   A father's keen resentment of such wrong:
   But let us still be wise; this short delay
   Will make revenge the surer; to its aim
   A just direction give.

De Grey.
                                            The earl is right:
   We shall but work in the dark, impatient Lorne,
   If we too soon begin.

Arg.
                                            How far Maclean
   Hath to this horrible attempt consented,
   Or privy been, we may be certified,
   By waiting silently to learn the tale
   That he will tell us of his lady's loss,
   When he shall send to give us notice of it,
   As doubtless soon he will.

De Grey.
   If he, beset and threaten'd, to those fiends,
   Unknowing of their purpose, hath unwillingly
   Committed her, he will himself, belike,
   If pride prevent him not, your aid solicit
   To set him free from his disgraceful thraldom.

Lorne.
   And if he should, shrunk be this sinew'd arm,
   If it unsheath a weapon in his cause!
   Let ev'ry ragged stripling on his lands
   In wanton mock'ry mouth him with contempt;
   Benlora head his vassals; and Lochtarish—
   That serpent, full of ev'ry devilish wile,
   His prison-keeper and his master be!

De Grey.
   Ay; and the keeper also of his son,
   The infant heir.

Lorne

 starting .
   I did not think of this.

Arg.
   Then let thy headstrong fury pause upon it.
   Thanks to Sir Hubert's prudence! thou as yet
   Before thy followers hast restrained been;
   And who this lady is, whom to the castle,
   Like a mysterious stranger, ye have brought,
   From them remains conceal'd.—My brave De Grey!
   This thy considerate foresight, join'd to all
   Thy other service in this woeful matter,
   Hath made us much thy debtor.

De Grey.
   I have indeed, my lord, consider'd only
   What I believed would Helen's wishes be,
   Ere she herself could utter them; if this
   Hath proved equivalent to wiser foresight,
   Let it direct us still; let Helen's wishes
   Your measures guide.

Arg.
   Ah, brave De Grey! would they had ever done so!
   I had not now—

 Taking Sir Hubert ' s hand with emotion.
                                            Forgive me, noble youth!
   Alas, alas! the father's tenderness
   Before the chieftain's policy gave way,
   And all this wreck hath been.

Lorne.
                                            'Tis even so.
   That cursed peace; that coward's shadeless face
   Of smiles and promises, to all things yielding
   With weak, unmanly pliancy, so gain'd you—
   Even you, the wise Argyll!—it made me mad!
   Who hath no point that he maintains against you,
   No firmness hath to hold him of your side:
   Who cannot sturdily against me stand,
   And say, “Encroach no farther,” friend of mine
   Shall never be.

De Grey.
                                            Nay, Lorne, forbear!—forbear!
   Thine own impetuous wilfulness did make
   The other's pliant mind more specious seem;
   And thou thyself didst to that luckless union,
   Although unwittingly, assistance lend.
   Make now amends for it, and curb thy spirit,
   While that the Earl with calmer judgment waits
   His time for action.



 
Lorne.
   Beshrew me, but thy counsel strangely smacks
   Of cautious timid age! In faith, De Grey,
   But that I know thy noble nature well,
   I could believe thee—

Arg.
                                            Peace, unruly spirit!
   Bold as thou art, methinks, with locks like these,
   Thy father still may say to thee, “Be silent!”

Lorne

 checking himself, and bowing very low to Argyll .
   And be obey'd devoutly.—O forgive me!
   Those locks are to your brows a kingly fillet
   Of strong authority, to which my heart
   No rebel is, though rude may be my words.

 Taking Sir Hubert 's hand with an assured countenance.
   I ask not thee, De Grey, to pardon me.
   Resistance here with gentleness is join'd:
   Therefore I've loved thee, and have laid upon thee
   The hand of sure possession! claiming still
   A friend's endurance of my froward temper,
   Which, froward as it is, from thee hath borne
   What never human being but thyself
   Had dared to goad it with.

De Grey.
                                            It is indeed
   Thy well-earn'd right thou askest, noble Lorne,
   And it is yielded to thee cheerfully.

Arg.
   My aged limbs are tired with pacing here;
   Some one approaches: within that grove
   We'll find a shady seat, and there conclude
   This well-debated point.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A court within the castle, surrounded with buildings.

Enter Dugald and a Vassal, two servants at the same time crossing the stage, with covered dishes in their hands.
Vas.
   I'll wait until the Earl shall be at leisure;
   My business presses not. Where do they carry
   Those cover'd meats? Have ye within the castle
   Some noble prisoner?

Dugald.
   Would so it were! but these are days of peace.
   They bear them to the stranger dame's apartment,
   Whom they have told thee of. There, at her door,
   An ancient faithful handmaid of the house,
   Whate'er they bring receives; for none beside
   Of all the household is admitted.

Vas.
   Now, by my fay! my purse and dirk I'd give
   To know who this may be.—Some chieftain's lady
   Whom John of Lorne—

Dugald.
                                            Nay, there, I must believe,
   Thou guessest erringly.—I grant, indeed,
   He doffs his bonnet to each tacks-man's wife,
   And is with every coif amongst them all,
   Both young and old, in such high favour held,
   Nor maiden, wife, nor beldame of the clan
   But to the Earl doth her petition bring
   Through intercession of the Lord of Lorne;
   But never yet did husband, sire, or brother,
   Of wrong from him complain.

Vas.
                                            I know it well.

Dugald.
   But be she who she may,
   This stranger here; I doubt not, friend, ere long,
   We shall have bickering for her in the field
   With some fierce foe or other.

Vas.
                                            So I trust:
   And by my honest faith! this peace of ours
   Right long and tiresome is—I thought, ere now,
   Some of our restless neighbours would have trespass'd
   And inroads made: but no; Argyll and Lorne
   Have grown a terror to them: all is quiet;
   And we ourselves must the aggressors be,
   Or still this dull and slothful life endure,
   Which makes our men of three-score years and ten
   To fret and murmur.


Enter Rosa , with a servant conducting her.
Serv.

 to Dugald .
   A lady here, would see my Lord of Lorne.

Dugald.
   Yes, still to him they come.

 Looking at Rosa.
                                            Ha! see I rightly?
   Rosa from Mull?

Rosa.
                                            Yes, Dugald; here thou seest
   A woeful bearer of unwelcome tidings.

Dugald.
   What, hath thy lady sent thee?

Rosa.
   Alas, alas! I have no lady now.

Dugald.
   Ha! is she dead? not many days ago
   She was alive and well.—Hast thou so soon
   The castle quitted—left thy lady's corse?

Rosa.
   Thinkst thou I would have left her?—On the night
   When, as they say, she died, I from the castle
   By force was ta'en, and to mainland convey'd;
   Where in confinement I remain'd, till chance
   Gave me the means of breaking from my prison;
   And hither am I come, in woeful plight,
   The dismal tale to tell.

Dugald.
                                            A tale, indeed,
   Most dismal, strange, and sudden.

Rosa.
                                            How she died
   God knows; but much I fear foul play she had.
   Where is the Lord of Lorne? for first to him
   I wish to speak.

Dugald.
   Come, I will lead thee to him.—Had foul play!

Vassal.
   Fell fiends they are could shed her blood! If this
   Indeed hath been, 'twill make good cause, I wot;
   The warlike pipe will sound our summons soon.


 Exeunt Dugald and Rosa , &c., as Argyll and Sir Hubert enter by the opposite side.


 
Arg.
   And wilt thou leave us then, my noble friend?
   May we not still for some few days retain thee?

De Grey.
   Where'er I go, I carry in my heart
   A warm remembrance of the friendly home
   That still within these hospitable walls
   I've found; but longer urge me not to stay.
   In Helen's presence now, constrain'd and strange,
   With painful caution, chasing from my lips
   The ready thought, half-quiver'd into utterance,
   For cold corrected words, expressive only
   Of culprit consciousness,—I sit; nor e'en
   May look upon her face but as a thing
   On which I may not look; so painful now
   The mingled feeling is, since dark despair
   With one faint ray of hope hath temper'd been.
   I can no more endure it. She herself
   Perceives it, and it pains her.—Let me then
   Bid you farewell, my lord. When evening comes,
   I'll, under favour of the rising moon,
   Set forth.

Arg.
   Indeed! so soon? and must it be?

De Grey.
   Yes; to Northumberland without delay
   I fain would take my road. My aged father
   Looks now impatiently for my return.

Arg.
   Then I'll no longer urge thee. To thy father,
   The noble baron, once, in better days,
   My camp-mate and my friend, I must resign thee.
   Bear to him every kind and cordial wish
   An ancient friend can send, and—

 A horn heard without.
   Hark! that horn!
   Some messenger of moment is arrived.—
   We'll speak of this again.—The moon to-night
   Is near the full, and at an early hour—

Enter a Messenger, bearing a letter.
   Whose messenger art thou, who in thy hand
   That letter bearst with broad and sable seal,
   Which seems to bring to me some dismal tidings?

Mess.
   From Mull, my lord, I come; and the Maclean,
   Our chief, commission'd me to give you this,
   Which is indeed with dismal tidings fraught.


 Argyll opens the letter, and reads it with affected surprise and sorrow.
Arg.
   Heavy, indeed, and sudden is the loss—
   The sad calamity that hath befallen.
   The will of heaven be done!

 Putting a handkerchief to his eyes, and leaning, as if for support, upon Sir Hubert ; then, after a pause, turning to the messenger.
   How didst thou leave the chieftain? He, I hope,
   Permits not too much sorrow to o'er come
   His manhood. Doth he bear his grief composedly?

Mess.
   O no, it is most violent! At the funeral,
   Had not the good Lochtarish, by his side,
   Supported him, he had with very grief
   Sunk to the earth.—And good Lochtarish too
   Was in right great affliction.

Arg.
                                            Ay, good man;
   I doubt it not.—Ye've had a splendid funeral?

Mess.
   O yes, my lord! that have we had. Good truth!
   A grand and stately burial has it been.
   Three busy days and nights through all the isle
   Have bagpipes play'd, and sparkling beakers flow'd;
   And never corse, I trow, i' th' earth was laid
   With louder lamentations.

Arg.
                                            Ay, I doubt not,
   Their grief was loud enough.—Pray pass ye in.

 To attendants at a distance. 
   Conduct him there; and see that he be treated,
   After his tedious journey, as befits
   A way-tired stranger.

 Exeunt all but Argyll and Sir Hubert.
   This doth all hope and all belief exceed.
   Maclean will shortly follow this his notice,

 Giving Sir Hubert the letter.
   To make me here a visit of condolence;
   And thus within our power they put themselves
   With most assured blindness.

De Grey

 after reading it .
                                            'Tis Lochtarish,
   In all the arts of dark hypocrisy
   So deeply skill'd, who doth o'ershoot his mark,
   As such full often do.

Arg.
                                            And let him come!
   At his own arts we trust to match him well.—
   Their force, I guess, is not in readiness;
   Therefore, meantime, to stifle all suspicion,
   This specious mummery he hath devised;
   And his most wretched chief, led by his will,
   Most wretchedly submits.—Well, let us go
   And tell to Lorne the news, lest too unguardedly
   He should receive it.


 Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
An apartment in the castle.

Enter Sir Hubert de Grey , beckoning to Ross , who appears on the opposite side.
De Grey.
   Rosa; I pray thee, spare me of thy leisure
   Some precious moments: something would I say:
   Wilt thou now favour me?

Rosa.
                                            Most willingly.

De Grey.
   As yet thy mistress knows not of the letter
   Sent by Maclean, announcing his design
   Of paying to the earl this sudden visit—
   This mockery of condolence?

Rosa.
                                            No; the earl
   Forbade me to inform her.

De Grey.
                                            This is well;


 
   Her mind must be prepared. Meantime I go,
   And thou art here to comfort and attend her:
   O do it gently, Rosa! do it wisely!

Rosa.
   You need not doubt my will.—Go ye so soon;
   And to Northumberland?

De Grey.
                                            So I intended.
   And so Argyll and John of Lorne believe:
   But since this messenger from Mull arrived,
   Another thought has struck me.—Saidst thou not
   The child—thy lady's child, ta'en from the castle,
   Is to the keeping of Lochtarish' mother
   Committed, whose lone house is on the shore?

Rosa.
   Yes, whilst in prison pent, so did I hear
   My keeper say, and much it troubled me.

De Grey.
   Canst thou to some good islander commend me,
   Within whose house I might upon the watch
   Conceal'd remain?—It is to Mull I go,
   And not to England. While Maclean is here,
   Attended by his vassals, the occasion
   I'll seize to save the infant.

Rosa.
                                            Bless thee for it!
   Heaven bless thee for the thought!—I know a man—
   An aged fisherman, who will receive you;
   Uncle to Morton: and if he himself
   Still in the island be, there will you find him,
   Most willing to assist you.

De Grey.
                                            Hush, I pray
   I hear thy lady's steps.

Rosa.
   Near to the castle gate, ere you depart,
   I'll be in waiting to inform you farther
   Of what may aid your purpose.

De Grey.
                                            Do, good Rosa,
   And make me much thy debtor. But be secret.

Rosa.
   You need not doubt me.


Enter Helen , and De Grey goes up to her as if he would speak, but the words falter on his lips, and he is silent.
Helen.
   Alas! I see it is thy parting visit;
   Thou com'st to say “farewell!”

De Grey.
   Yes, Helen: I am come to leave with thee
   A friend's dear benison—a parting wish—
   A last—rest ev'ry blessing on thy head!
   Be this permitted to me:

 Kissing her hand with profound respect.
                                            Fare thee well!
   Heaven aid and comfort thee! Farewell! farewell!


 Is about to retire hastily, whilst Helen follows to prevent him.
Helen.
   O go not from me with that mournful look!
   Alas! thy gen'rous heart, depress'd and sunk,
   Looks on my state too sadly.—
   I am not, as thou thinkst, a thing so lost
   In woe and wretchedness.—Believe not so!
   All whom misfortune with her rudest blasts
   Hath buffeted, to gloomy wretchedness
   Are not therefore abandon'd. Many souls
   From cloister'd cells, from hermits' caves, from holds
   Of lonely banishment, and from the dark
   And dreary prison-house, do raise their thoughts
   With humble cheerfulness to heaven, and feel
   A hallow'd quiet, almost akin to joy;
   And may not I, by heaven's kind mercy aided,
   Weak as I am, with some good courage bear
   What is appointed for me?—O be cheer'd!
   And let not sad and mournful thoughts of me
   Depress thee thus.—When thou art far away,
   Thou'lt hear, the while, that in my father's house
   I spend my peaceful days, and let it cheer thee.
   I too shall ev'ry southern stranger question,
   Whom chance may to these regions bring, and learn
   Thy fame and prosperous state.

De Grey.
   My fame and prosperous state, while thou art thus!
   If thou in calm retirement liv'st contented,
   Lifting thy soul to heaven, what lack I more?
   My sword and spear, changed to a pilgrim's staff,
   Will be a prosperous state; and for my fame,—
   A feeble sound that after death remains,
   The echo of an unrepeated stroke
   That fades away to silence,—surely this
   Thou dost not covet for me.

Helen.
                                            Ah, I do!
   Yet, granting here I err, didst thou not promise
   To seek in wedded love and active duties
   Thy share of cheerful weal?—and dost thou now
   Shrink from thy gen'rous promise?—No, thou shalt not.
   I hold thee bound—I claim it of thee boldly.
   It is my right. If thou, in sad seclusion,
   A lonely wanderer art, thou dost extinguish
   The ray that should have cheer'd my gloom: thou makest
   What else had been a calm and temper'd sorrow,
   A state of wretchedness.—O no! thou wilt not!
   Take to thy gen'rous heart some virtuous maid,
   And doubt not thou a kindred heart wilt find.
   The cheerful tenderness of woman's nature
   To thine is suited, and when join'd to thee,
   Will grow in virtue:—Take thou then this ring,
   If thou wilt honour so my humble gift,
   And put it on her hand; and be assured
   She who shall wear it,—she whose happy fate
   Is link'd with thine, will prove a noble mate.

De Grey.
   O there I am assured! she whose fate
   Is link'd with mine, if fix'd be such decree,
   Most rich in every soft and noble trait
   Of female virtue is: in this full well
   Assured I am.—I would—I thought—forgive—
   I speak but raving words:—a hasty spark,
   Blown and extinguish'd, makes me waver thus.
   Permit me then again.

 Kissing her hand.
                                            High heaven protect thee!
   Farewell!



 
Helen.
   Farewell! and heaven's good charge be thou!


 They part, and both turn away to opposite sides of the stage, when Sir Hubert , looking round just as he is about to go off, and seeing Helen also looking after him sorrowfully, eagerly returns.
De Grey.
   Ah! are those looks—

 Going to kneel at her feet, but immediately checking himself with much embarrassment.
                                            Alas! why come I back?
   Something there was—thou gavest me a ring;
   I have not dropp'd it?

Rosa

 coming forward .
   No, 'tis on your finger.

De Grey.
   Ay, true, good Rosa; but my wits are wilder'd;
   I knew not what I sought.—
                                            Farewell! farewell!


 Exit De Grey hastily, while Helen and Rosa go off by the opposite side.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Argyll 's castle, the vestibule, or grand entrance; a noise of bustle and voices heard without, and servants seen crossing the stage, as the scene opens.

Enter Dugald , meeting  st servant.
Dugald.
   They are arrived, Maclean and all his train;
   Run quickly, man, and give our chieftains notice.

 st serv.
   They know already: from the tower we spied
   The mournful cavalcade: the Earl and Lorne
   Are down the staircase hasting to receive them.

Dugald.
   I've seen them light, a sooty-coated train,
   With lank and woeful faces, and their eyes
   Bent to the ground, as though our castle gate
   Had been the scutcheon'd portal of a tomb,
   Set open to receive them.

 d serv.
   Ay, on the pavement fall their heavy steps
   Measured and slow, as if her palled coffin
   They follow'd still.

Dugald.
                                            Hush, man! Here comes the Earl,
   With face composed and stern; but look behind him
   How John of Lorne doth gnaw his nether lip,
   And beat his clenched hand against his thigh,
   Like one who tampers with half-bridled ire!

 d serv.
   Has any one offended him?

Dugald.
                                            Be silent,
   For they will overhear thee.—Yonder too

 Pointing to the opposite side of the stage.
   Come the Macleans: let us our stations keep,
   And see them meet.


 Retiring with the other to the bottom of the stage.

Enter Argyll and Lorne , attended, and in deep mourning; while, at the same time, by the opposite side of the stage, enter Maclean, Benlora, Lochtarish , and Glenfadden , with attendants, also in deep mourning : Argyll and Maclean go up to one another, and formally embrace.
Arg.
   Welcome! if such a cheerful word as this
   May with our deep affliction suited be.
   Lochtarish too, and brave Benlora, ay,
   And good Glenfadden also,—be ye all
   With due respect received, as claims your worth.


 Taking them severally by the hand as he names them. Maclean then advances to embrace Lorne , who shrinks back from him, but immediately correcting himself, bends his body another way, as if suddenly seized with some violent pain.
Arg.

 to Maclean .
   Regard him not: he hath imprudently
   A recent wound exposed to chiling air,
   And oft the pain with sudden pang attacks him.

Loch.
   Ay, what is shrewder? we have felt the like,
   And know it well, my lord.

Arg.

 bowing to Lochtarish , but continuing to speak to Maclean .
   Yet, ne'ertheless, good son-in-law and chieftain,
   Believe thou well that with a brother's feelings,
   Proportion'd to the dire and dismal case
   That hath befallen, he now receives you; also
   Receiving these your friends with equal favour.
   This is indeed to us a woeful meeting,
   Chieftain of Mull.

 Looking keenly in his face, while the other shuns his eye.
                                            I see full well the change
   Which violent grief upon that harrow'd visage
   So deeply hath impress'd.

Mac.

 still embarrassed, and shrinking from Argyll 's observation .
   Ah! ah! the woeful day!—I cannot speak.
   Alas, alas!

Arg.
                                            Alas, in truth,
   Too much the woeful widower's alter'd looks,
   Upon thy face I see.

Loch.

 to Argyll .
   You see, my lord, his eyes with too much weeping
   Are weak, and shun the light. Nor should we marvel:
   What must to him the sudden loss have been,
   When even to us, who were more distantly
   Connected with her rare and matchless virtue,
   It brought such keen affliction?

Arg.
   Yes, good Lochtarish, I did give her to you—
   To your right worthy chief, a noble creature,
   With every kindly virtue—every grace


 
   That might become a noble chieftain's wife:
   And that ye have so well esteem'd—so well
   Regarded, cherish'd, and respected her,
   As your excessive sorrow now declares,
   Receive from me a grateful father's thanks.
   Lochtarish, most of all to thy good love
   I am beholden.

Loch.
                                            Ah! small was the merit
   Such goodness to respect.

Arg.
                                            And thou, Benlora;
   A woman, and a stranger, on the brave
   Still potent claims maintain; and little doubt I
   They were by thee regarded.

 Benlora steps back, frowning sternly, and remains silent.
                                            And, Glenfadden,
   Be not thy merits overlook'd.

Glen.
                                            Alas!
   You overrate, my lord, such slender service.

Arg.
   Wrong not, I pray, thy modest worth.—But here,

 Turning again to Maclean.
   Here most of all, from whom her gentle virtues,

 And so indeed it right and fitting was ,
   Their best and dearest recompense received,
   To thee, most generous chieftain, let me pay
   The thanks that are thy due.

Mac.
                                            Oh, oh! alas!

Arg.
   Ay, in good sooth! I see thy grief-worn eyes
   Do shun the light.
   But grief is ever sparing of its words.
   In brief, I thank you all: and for the love
   Ye have so dearly shown to me and mine,
   I trust, before we part, to recompense you
   As suits your merit and my gratitude.

Lorne

 aside to Argyll .
   Ay, father; now ye speak to them shrewd words;
   And now I'm in the mood to back you well.

Arg.

 aside to Lorne .
   'Tis well thou art; but check those eager looks;
   Lochtarish eyes thee keenly.


 Directing a hasty glance to Lochtarish , who is whispering to Glenfadden , and looking suspiciously at Lorne.
Lorne

 stepping forward to Maclean , &c. .
   Chieftain, and honour'd gentlemen, I pray
   The sullen, stern necessity excuse
   Which pain imposed upon me, and receive,
   Join'd with my noble father's, such poor thanks
   As I may offer to your loving worth.

Arg.
   Pass on, I pray you; till the feast be ready,
   Rest ye above, where all things are prepared
   For your refreshment.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A narrow arched room or closet, adjoining to a gallery.

Enter Lochtarish and Glenfadden.
Loch.
   How likest thou this, Glenfadden? Doth the face
   Argyll assumes, of studied courtesy,
   Raise no suspicion?

Glen.
                                            Faith, I know not well!—
   The speech, indeed, with which he welcomed us,
   Too wordy, and too artificial seem'd
   To be the native growth of what he felt.

Loch.
   It so to me appear'd: and John of Lorne,
   First shrinking from Maclean, with sudden pain,
   As he pretended, struck; then stern and silent;
   Till presently assuming, like his father,
   A courtesy minute and over-studied,
   He glozed us with his thanks:—
   Didst thou not mark his keenly flashing eye,
   When spoke Argyll of recompensing us
   Before we part?

Glen.
                                            I did indeed observe it.

Loch.
   This hath a meaning.

Glen.
                                            Faith, I do suspect
   Some rumour must have reach'd their ear; and yet
   Our agents faithful are; it cannot be.

Loch.
   Or can, or can it not, beneath this roof
   A night I will not sleep. When evening comes
   Meet we again. If at this banquet, aught
   Shall happen to confirm our fears, forthwith
   Let us our safety seek in speedy flight.

Glen.
   And leave Maclean behind us?

Loch.
   Ay, and Benlora too. Affairs the better
   At Mull will thrive, when we have rid our hands
   Of both these hind'rances, who in our way
   Much longer may not be.

 Listening.
                                            We're interrupted.
   Let us into the gallery return,
   And join the company with careless face,
   Like those who have from curiosity
   But stepp'd aside to view the house.—Make haste!
   It is Argyll and Lorne.


 Exeunt, looking at the opposite side, alarmed, at which enter Argyll and Lorne.
Lorne.
   Are you not now convinced? his conscious guilt
   Is in his downcast and embarrass'd looks,
   And careful shunning of all private converse
   Whene'er aside you've drawn him from his train,
   Too plainly seen: you cannot now, my lord,
   Doubt of his share in this atrocious deed.

Arg.
   Yet, Lorne, I would, ere further we proceed,
   Prove it more fully still. The dinner hour
   Is now at hand.

 Listening.
                                            What steps are those,
   That in the gallery, close to this door,
   Like some lone straggler from the company
   Withdrawn, sound quickly pacing to and fro?
   Look out and see.

Lorne

 going to the door, and calling back to Argyll in a low voice .
   It is Maclean himself.

Arg.
   Beckon him hither then.—Thank heaven for this!
   Now opportunity is fairly given,


 
   If that constrainedly he cloaks their guilt,
   To free him from their toils.


Enter Maclean , conducted by Lorne.
Arg.

 to Maclean .
   My son, still in restraint before our vassals
   Have we conversed; but now in privacy—
   Start not, I pray thee:—sit thee down, Maclean:
   I would have close and private words of thee:
   Sit down, I pray; my aged limbs are tired.

 Argyll and Maclean sit down, whilst Lorne stands behind them, with his ear bent eagerly to listen, and his eyes fixed with a side-glance on Maclean.
   Chieftain, I need not say to thee, who deeply
   Lament'st with us our sad untimely loss,
   How keenly I have felt it.—
   And now indulge a father in his sorrow,
   And say how died my child.—Was her disease
   Painful as it was sudden?

Mac.
   It was—alas! I know not how it was.
   A fell disease!—Her end was so appointed.

Lorne

 behind .
   Ay, that I doubt not.

Mac.
   A fearful malady! though it received
   All good assistance.

Lorne

 behind .
                                            That I doubt not either.

Mac.
   A cruel ill!—but how it dealt with her,
   My grief o'erwhelm'd me so, I could not tell.

Arg.
   Say—wast thou present? didst thou see her die?

Mac.
   Oh, oh! the woeful sight, that I should see it!

Arg.
   Thou didst not see it then?

Mac.
                                            Alack! alack!
   O would that I had seen—O woe is me!
   Her pain—her agony was short to mine!

Lorne

 behind, impatiently .
   Is this an answer, chieftain, to the question
   Argyll hath plainly ask'd thee—wast thou present
   When Helen died? didst thou behold her death?

Mac.
   O yes; indeed I caught your meaning lamely;
   I meant—I thought—I know not certainly
   The very time and moment of her death,
   Although within my arms she breathed her last.

Lorne

 rushing forward eagerly .
   Now are we answered.


 Argyll , covering his face with his hands, throws himself back in his chair for some time without speaking.
Mac.

 to Argyll .
   I fear, my lord, too much I have distress'd you.

Arg.
   Somewhat you have indeed.—And further now
   I will not press your keen and recent sorrow
   With questions that so much renew its anguish.

Mac.
   You did, belike, doubt of my tenderness.

Arg.
   O no! I have no doubts. Within your arms
   She breathed her last?

Mac.
                                            Within my arms she died.

Arg.

 looking hard at Maclean , and then turning away .
   His father was a brave and honest chief!

Mac.
   What says my lord?

Arg.
                                            A foolish exclamation,
   Of no determined meaning.

 Bell sounds without.
                                            Dry our tears:
   The hall-bell warns us to the ready feast;
   And through the gallery I hear the sound
   Of many footsteps hastening to the call.
   Chieftain, I follow thee.


 Exeunt Argyll and Maclean.
Lorne

 alone, stopping to listen .
                                            The castle, throng'd throughout with moving life,
   From every winding stair, and arched aisle,
   A mingled echo sends.
   Ay; light of foot, I hear their sounding steps
   A-trooping to the feast, who never more
   At feast shall sit, or social meal partake.
   O wretch! O fiend of vile hypocrisy!
   How fiercely burns my blood within my veins
   Till I am match'd with thee!


 Exit.
SCENE III.
The great hall of the castle, with a feast set out, and the company already placed at table, with servants and attendants in waiting, who fill the stage in every part : Argyll is seated at the head of the table, with Maclean on his left hand, and a chair left empty on his right.
Arg.

 to Maclean , &c. 
   Most worthy chief, and honour'd guests and kinsmen,
   I crave your pardon for this short delay:
   One of our company is wanting still,
   For whom we have reserved this empty place;
   Nor will the chief of Mull unkindly take it,
   That on our better hand this chair of honour
   Is for a lady kept.

Omnes.
                        A lady!


 A general murmur of surprise is heard through the hall.
Arg.
                                            Yes;
   Who henceforth of this house the mistress is;
   And were it palace of our Scottish king,
   Would so deserve to be.

Omnes.
                                            We give you joy, my lord.


 A confused murmur heard again.
Mac.
   We give you joy, my lord: your age is bless'd.
   We little thought, in these our funeral weeds,
   A bridal feast to darken.

Lorne.
                                            No, belike.
   Many who don their coat at break of day,
   Know not what shall befal them, therein girt,
   Ere evening close.

 Assuming a gay tone.
   The Earl hath set a step-dame o'er my head


 
   To cow my pride—What think you, brave Maclean?
   This world so fleeting is and full of change,
   Some lose their wives, I trow, and others find them.
   Bridegrooms and widowers do, side by side,
   Their beakers quaff; and which of them at heart
   Most glad or sorry is, the subtle fiend,
   Who in men's hollow hearts his council holds,
   He wotteth best, though each good man will swear,
   His, lost or found , all other dames excell'd.

Arg.
   Curb, Lorne, thy saucy tongue: Maclean himself
   Shall judge if she—the lady I have found,
   Equal in beauty her whom he hath lost.
   In worth I'm sure she does. But hush! she comes.


 A great commotion through the hall amongst the attendants, &c.
Omnes.
   It is the lady.

Arg.

 rising from his seat, and making signs to the attendants nearest the door .
   Ho there! make room, and let the lady pass.


 The servants, &c. stand apart, ranging themselves on every side to let the lady pass; and enter Helen , magnificently dressed, with a deep white veil over her face; while Lorne , going forward to meet her, conducts her to her chair on Argyll 's right hand.
Arg.

 to the Campbells .
   Now, fill a cup of welcome to our friends!

Loch.

 to Maclean .
   Chieftain, forgettest thou to greet the lady?

Mac.

 turning to Argyll .
   Nay, rather give, my lord, might I presume,
   Our firstling cup to this fair lady's health,
   The noble dame of this right princely house.
   And though close veil'd she be, her beauty's lustre
   I little question.

 Fills up a goblet, while Lochtarish, Benlora , &c. follow his example, and standing up, bow to the lady.
   Your health, most noble dame!


 Helen , rising also, bows to him, and throws back her veil: the cup falls from his hands; all the company start up from table; screams and exclamations of surprise are heard from all corners of the hall, and confused commotion seen every where. Maclean, Lochtarish , and Glenfadden , stand appalled and motionless; but Benlora , looking fiercely round him, draws his sword.
Ben.
   What! are we here like deer bay'd in a nook?
   And think ye so to slay us, crafty foe?
   No, by my faith! like such we will not fall,
   Arms in our hands, though by a thousand foes
   Encompass'd. Cruel, murderous, ruthless men,
   Too good a warrant have you now to think us,
   But cowards never!
                                            Rouse ye, base Macleans!
   And thou, whose subtlety around us thus
   With wreckful skill these cursed toils hast wound,
   Sinks thy base spirit now?


 To Lochtarish.
Arg.

 holding up his hand .
   Be silence in the hall!
   Macleans, ye are my guests; but if the feast
   Delight you not, free leave ye have to quit it.
   Lorne, see them all, with right due courtesy,
   Safely protected to the castle gate.

 Turning to Maclean.
   Here, other name than chieftain or Maclean
   He may not give thee; but, without our walls,
   If he should call thee murderer, traitor, coward,
   Weapon to weapon, let your fierce contention
   Be fairly held, and he, who first shall yield,
   The liar be.—
                                            Campbells! I charge you there,
   Free passage for the chieftain and his train.


 Maclean and Lochtarish , &c., without speaking, quit the hall through the crowd of attendants, who divide, and form a line to let them pass. Helen , who had sunk down almost senseless upon her seat, seeing the hall cleared of the crowd, who go out after the Macleans , now starts up, and catches hold of Argyll with an imploring look of strong distress.
Helen.
   O father! well I know foul are his crimes,
   But what—O what, am I, that for my sake
   This bloody strife should be?—O think, my lord!
   He gave consent and sanction to my death,
   But thereon could not look: and at your gate—
   E'en on your threshold, must his life be ta'en?
   For well I know the wrath of Lorne is deadly.
   And gallant Lorne himself, if scath should be,—
   O pity! pity!—O for pity stay them!

Arg.
   Let go thy hold, weak woman: pity now!
   Rosa, support her hence.


 Committing her to Rosa , who now comes forward, and tearing himself away.
Helen

 endeavouring to run after him, and catch hold of him again .
   O be not stern! beneath the ocean rather
   Would I had sunk to rest, than been the cause
   Of horrid strife like this! O pity! pity!


 Exeunt, she running out after him distractedly.
SCENE IV.
Before the gate of the castle: a confused noise of an approaching crowd heard within, and presently enter, from the gate , Maclean, Benlora, Lochtarish , and Glenfadden , with their attendants, conducted by Lorne , and followed by a crowd of Campbells , who range themselves on both sides of the stage.
Lorne

 to Maclean .
   Now, chieftain, we the gate have pass'd,—the bound


 
   That did restrain us. Host and guest no more,
   But deadly foes we stand, who from this spot
   Shall never both with life depart. Now, turn,
   And boldly say to him, if so thou darest,
   Who calls thee villain, murd'rer, traitor, coward,
   That he belies thee. Turn then, chief of Mull!
   Here, man to man, my single arm to thine,
   I give thee battle; or, refusing this,
   Our captive here retain thee to be tried
   Before the summon'd vassals of our clans,
   As suits thy rank and thine atrocious deeds.
   Take thou thy choice.

Mac.
                                            Yes, John of Lorne, I turn.
   This turf on which we tread my death-bed is;
   This hour my latest term; this sky of light
   The last that I shall look on. Draw thy sword:
   The guilt of many crimes o'erwhelms my spirit
   But never will I shame my brave Macleans,
   By dying, as their chief, a coward's death.

Ben.
   What! shalt thou fight alone, and we stand by
   Idly to look upon it?

 Going up fiercely to Lorne.
                                            Turn me out
   The boldest, brawniest Campbell of your bands;
   Ay, more than one, as many as you will;
   And I the while, albeit these locks be grey,
   Leaning my aged back against this tree,
   Will show your youngsters how, in other days,
   Macleans did fight, when baited round with foes.

Lorne.
   Be still, Benlora; other sword than these,
   Thy chief's and mine, shall not this day be drawn.
   If I prevail against him, here with us
   Our captives you remain. If I be conquer'd,
   Upon the faith and honour of a chieftain,
   Ye shall again to Mull in safety go.

Ben.
   Spoken like a noble chieftain!

Lorne.
   Ye shall, I say, to Mull in safety go.
   But there prepare ye to defend your coast
   Against a host of many thousand Campbells.
   In which, be well assured, swords as good
   As John of Lorne's, to better fortune join'd,
   Shall of your crimes a noble vengeance take.


 Lorne and Maclean fight; and, after a combat of some length , Maclean is mortally wounded, and the Campbells give a loud shout.
Mac.
   It is enough, brave Lorne; this wound is death:
   And better deed thou couldst not do upon me,
   Than rid me of a life disgraced and wretched.
   But guilty though I be, thou seest full well,
   That to the brave opposed, arms in hand,
   I am no coward.—Oh! could I as bravely,
   In home-raised broils, with violent men have striv'n,
   It had been well: but there, alas! I proved
   A poor, irresolute, and nerveless wretch.

 After a pause, and struggling for breath.
   To live, alas! in good men's memories
   Detested and contemn'd:—to be with her
   For whom I thought to be—Come, gloomy grave!
   Thou coverest all!

 After another painful struggle, every one standing in deep silence round him, and Lorne bending over him compassionately.
                                            Pardon of man I ask not,
   And merit not.—Brave Lorne, I ask it not;
   Though in thy piteous eye a look I see
   That might embolden me.—There is above
   One who doth know the weakness of our nature,—
   Our thoughts and conflicts:—all that e'er have breathed,
   The bann'd and bless'd must pass to Him:—my soul
   Into His hands, in humble penitence,
   I do commit.


 Dies.
Lorne.
   And may Heaven pardon thee, unhappy man!


Enter Argyll , and Helen following him, attended by Rosa.
Lorne

 to attendants .
   Alas, prevent her!

 Endeavouring to keep her back.
                                            Helen, come not hither:
   This is no sight for thee.

Helen

 pressing forward, and seeing the body .
   Oh! oh! and hast thou dealt with him so quickly,
   Thou fell and ruthless Lorne?—No time allow'd?

 Kneeling by the body.
   O that within that form sense still were lodged!
   To hear my voice,—to know that in my heart
   No thought of thee—Let others scan thy deeds,
   Pitied and pardon'd art thou here.

 Her hand on her breast.
                                            Alas!
   So quickly fell on thee th' avenging stroke,
   No sound of peace came to thy dying ear,
   No look of pity to thy closing eyes!
   Pitied and pardon'd art thou in this breast,
   But canst not know it now.—Alas! alas!

Arg.

 to attendants .
   Prepare ye speedily to move the body.
   Mean time, our prisoners within the castle
   Secure ye well.


 To other attendants, who lay hold of Lochtarish and Glenfadden , while Benlora , drawing his sword, attacks furiously those who attempt to seize and disarm him, and they, closing round and endeavouring to overpower him, he is mortally wounded in the scuffle.
Ben.
   Ay, bear me now within your prison walls;
   Alive indeed, thought ye to bind me? No.
   Two years within your dungeons have I lived,
   But lived for vengeance: closed that hope, the earth
   Close o'er me too!—Alive to bind Benlora!


 Falls.


 
Lorne

 running up to him .
   Ha! have ye slain him?—Fierce and warlike spirit!
   I'm glad that thou hast had a soldier's death,
   Arms in thy hands, all savage as thou art.

 Turning to Lochtarish and Glenfadden.
   But thou, the artful, base, contriving villain,
   Who hast of an atrocious, devilish act
   The mover been, and this thy vile associate,
   Prepare ye for the villains' shameful end,
   Ye have so dearly earn'd.


 Waving his hand for the attendants to lead them off.
Loch.
   Be not so hasty, Lorne.—Thinkst thou indeed
   Ye have us here within your grasp, and nought
   Of hostage or security retain'd
   For our protection?

Lorne.
                                            What dost thou mean?

Loch.
   Deal with us as ye will:
   But if within a week, return'd to Mull,
   In safety I appear not, with his blood,
   The helpless heir, thy sister's infant son,
   Who in my mother's house our pledge is kept,
   Must pay the forfeit.

Helen

 starting up from the body in an agony of alarm .
   O horrible! ye will not murder him?
   Murder a harmless infant!

Loch.
   My aged mother, lady, loves her son
   As thou dost thine; and she has sworn to do it.

Helen.
   Has sworn to do it! Oh! her ruthless nature
   Too well I know.

 To Lorne eagerly. 
                                            Loose them, and let them go!

Lorne.
   Let fiends like these escape?

Arg.

 to Helen .
                                            He does but threaten
   To move our fears: they dare not slay the child.

Helen.
   They dare! they will!—O if thou art my father!
   If Nature's hand e'er twined me to thy heart
   As this poor child to mine, have pity on me!
   Loose them and let them go!—Nay, do it quickly.
   O what is vengeance? Spare my infant's life!
   Unpitying Lorne!—art thou a brother too?
   The hapless father's blood is on thy sword,
   And wilt thou slay the child? O spare him! spare him!

 Kneeling to Argyll and Lorne , who stand irresolute, when enter Sir Hubert De Grey , carrying something in his arms, wrapped up in a mantle, and followed by Morton. On seeing Sir Hubert , she springs from the ground, and rushes forward to him.
   Ha! art thou here? in blessed hour return'd
   To join thy prayers with mine,—to move their hearts—
   Their flinty hearts;—to bid them spare my child!

De Grey

 lifting up the mantle, and showing a sleeping child .
   The prayer is heard already: look thou here
   Beneath this mantle where he soundly sleeps.


 Helen utters a cry of joy, and holds out her arms for the child, but at the same time sinks to the ground, embracing the knees of Sir Hubert. Argyll and Lorne run up to him, and all their vassals, &c., crowding round close them about on every side, while a general murmur of exultation is heard through the whole. Lochtarish and Glenfadden , remaining on the side of the stage with those who guard them, are struck with astonishment and consternation.
Arg.

 to those who guard Lochtarish , &c. stepping forward from the crowd .
   Lead to the grated keep your prisoners,
   There to abide their doom. Upon the guilty
   Our vengeance falls, and only on the guilty.
   To all their clan beside, in which I know
   Full many a gallant heart included is,
   I still extend a hand of amity.
   If they reject it, fair and open war
   Between us be: and trust we still to find them
   The noble, brave Macleans, the valiant foes,
   That, ere the dark ambition of a villain,
   For wicked ends, their gallant minds had warp'd,
   We heretofore had found them.

                                            O that men
   In blood so near, in country, and in valour,
   Should spend in petty broils their manly strength,
   That might, united for the public weal,
   On foreign foes such noble service do!
   O that the day were come when gazing southron,
   Whilst these our mountain warriors, marshall'd forth
   To meet in foreign climes their country's foes,
   Along their crowded cities slowly march,
   To sound of warlike pipe, their plaided bands,
   Shall say, with eager fingers pointing thus,
   “Behold those men!—their sunn'd but thoughtful brows:
   Their sinewy limbs; their broad and portly chests,
   Lapp'd in their native vestments, rude but graceful!—
   Those be our hardy brothers of the north;—
   The bold and gen'rous race, who have, beneath
   The frozen circle and the burning line,
   The rights and freedom of our native land
   Undauntedly maintain'd.”

                                            That day will come,
   When in the grave this hoary head of mine,
   And many after heads, in death are laid;
   And happier men, our sons, shall live to see it.
   O may they prize it too with grateful hearts;
   And, looking back on these our stormy days
   Of other years, pity, admire, and pardon
   The fierce, contentious, ill-directed valour
   Of gallant fathers, born in darker times!


 The curtain drops.



THE PHANTOM: A MUSICAL DRAMA, IN TWO ACTS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN Dunarden , Highland chief.

Malcolm , his son.

The Provost of Glasgow.

Claude , his son.

Crawford , friend of Claude .

Graham.

Allen, Culloch , and other Highlanders.

Sexton, servants, and other inhabitants of Glasgow.

WOMEN Alice , daughter of the Provost of Glasgow.

Marian , daughter of Dunarden.

Jessie , attending on Marian.

Bride, bridemaids, housekeeper, &c.



Scene, in the Western Highlands of Scotland, and afterwards in the city of Glasgow.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A green lawn, surrounded with rocks, and mountains seen in the distance. An assembly of Highlanders are discovered, holding bridal revelry: bagpipes playing, and a noise of voices heard, as the curtain draws up.

Enter Allen.
 st high.
   Welcome, brave Allen! we began to fear
   The water-kelpy, with her swathing arms,
   Had drown'd thee at the ford.

 d high.
   Faith did we, man! thee and thy shelty too.

Allen.
   Am I so late? There's time enough, I hope,
   To foot a measure with the bonnie bride,
   And maidens too.—'Tis well I'm come at all:
   I met the ill-eyed carline on my way.

 st high.
   And suffer'd scath by her?

Allen.
                                            Ay, scath enough:
   My shelty, in the twinkling of an eye,
   Became so restive, neither switch nor heel
   Could move him one step further.

 d high.
   And so you were obliged to come on foot.

Allen.
   What could I do? It was not with the beast
   I held contention, but the evil spell
   Of that untoward witch.—Ay, but for that,
   I would defy the wildest four-legg'd thing
   In all Lochaber so to master me!

 st high.
   Well, well; the pipes are playing merrily,—
   Make up lost time as fleetly as thou canst.

Allen.
   And so I will; for here are rosy partners,
   Ribbon'd and cockernonied, by my faith!
   Like very queens. They make, here as I stand,
   Each garter'd leg to thrill, and toes to tickle.

 Seizing one of a group of girls, advancing from the dancers at the bottom of the stage.
   Come, winsome Jean! I'll have a reel with thee.
   Look not so coy: where did I meet thee last?
   We have not had a merry-making here
   Since Duncan Mory's latewake.

Jean.
   Say nought of latewakes here, I warn you well:
   Wot ye who is the bridesmaid?

Allen.
   Some gentle dame, belike.

Jean.
                                            Some gentle dame!
   Dumbarton Mary, with her Lowland airs.

Allen.
   Ay! she that look'd so stern, and said it was
   A savage thing, or some such word as that,
   To dance at old Glenlyon's funeral.—
   But, could the laird himself have raised his head,
   He with his ivory stick had rapp'd her pate
   For marring with her mincing gentleness
   The decent bravery of his last rouse.—
   Come, let us have a merry reel together.


 They mix with dancers, who now advance to the front, where a bumpkin, or dance of many interwoven reels, is performed; after which the bride is led to a seat, and some of her maidens sit by her.
Bridegroom.
   Now, while the bride and bonnie maidens all
   Take needful rest, we'll pass the cheering cup.
   And, Rory of Glenoruch, clear thy throat,
   And sing some merry song, meet for a wedding,
   Where all are boon and gay.

Bride.
   O, never mind for that! give us the song
   Which thou wast wont on Clachen braes to sing,
   And we to praise. Thou knowst the song I mean.



 
Rory.
   On bridal day the bride must be obey'd:
   But 'tis a song devised for gentle-folks,
   Made by the youthful laird of Ballamorin,
   And not for common clansfolk like ourselves.

Bride.
   But let us have it ne'ertheless, good Rory;
   It shows how sweetly thwarted lovers meet
   O' moonlight nights, and talk of happy times
   Which fortune has in store for faithful hearts:
   The silliest moorland herd can follow that.

Rory.
   Then be it as you please: I'll do my best.

SONG.
   I've seen the moon gleam through the cave,
      And minute drops like diamonds glancing;
   I've seen, upon a heaving wave,
      The tressy-headed mermaid dancing:
   But ne'er was seen, in summer night,
      Beneath the moon, in brightness riding,
   A moving thing, to charm the sight,
      Like Flora to her Malcolm gliding.

   I've heard a pibroch, through the wind,
      As absent chief his home was nearing;
   A half-stripp'd infant, sweetly kind,
      With mimic words its mother cheering:
   But ne'er were evening sounds so sweet,
      As, near the spot of promise stealing,
   The quick, soft tread of Flora's feet,
      Then whisper'd words, herself revealing.

   My boat I've fastened to the stake,
      And on the shelly beach am pacing,
   While she is passing moor and brake,
      On heather braes her shadow tracing;
   And here we'll pass a happy hour,
      For hours and years of bliss preparing,
   When we shall grace our girdled tower,
      Lands, life, and love, together sharing.

Enter Culloch.
Allen.
   Ha! our young chief must be return'd, for here
   Comes Culloch, with his staring freckled face.

Omnes

 gathering round Culloch .
   Well, man, what are thy news? where hast thou been?

Cul.
   We've been at Glasgow.

 st high.
                                            Glasgow! Save us all!

Allen

 half aside to  st high. .
   I doubt it not: his master, I hear say,
   Goes oftener there than his good father wots of;
   Ay, or his sister either. I suspect
   There is some dainty lady—

 st high.
                                            Hush! say nothing.

Allen.
   And so, brave Culloch, thou hast travell'd far:
   And what is Glasgow like?

Cul.
   Like all Drumleary craigs set up in rows,
   And chimneys smoking on the top of them.
   It is an awful sight!

 st high.
   And what sawst thou besides the craigs and chimneys?

Cul.
   There be six kirks,—I told them on my fingers;
   And, rising from the slates of every kirk,
   There is a tower, where great bells ring so loud,
   That you might hear them, standing on this sward,
   Were they on great Benlawers.

 st high.
   Tut! tut! thy ears are better than thy wits.

Bride.
   And sawst thou any silken ladies there,
   With all their bravery on?

Cul.
   Ay, ladies, gentlemen, and red-coat soldiers,
   And plaided drovers, standing at the cross,
   As close as heather stalks on Hurroch moss.
   Ah! well I trow it is an awful place!

Allen

 aside as before .
   And well I trow the chief has business there
   He wishes no observer to discover,
   When he, of all the idle household loons,
   Took such an oaf as Culloch to attend him.
   But I'll e'en go, before he join the dance,
   And have a private word of him, to favour
   My poor old mother in her ruin'd cot.
   I know full well he will not say me nay,
   Though the old laird himself be cold and close.

 st high.
   Go, then, and speed thee well!


 Exit Allen.
Bridegroom.
   Hear, bonnie lassies! the young laird himself
   Will soon be here, and foot it with you featly.

Old woman.
   O, bless his comely face! among you all
   There is not one that foots the floor like him,—
   With such a merry glee and manly grace!

Bridegroom.
   We'll have no further dancing till he come.
   Meantime, good Rory, sing another song;
   Both bride and maidens like thy chanting well:
   And those who list may join the chorus rhyme.

SONG.
   Upon her saddle's quilted seat,
      High sat the bonnie Lowland bride;
   Squires rode before, and maidens sweet
      Were gently ambling by her side.
   What makes her look so pale and wan?—
   She's parted from her Highlandman.
      What makes her look, &c.

   Where'er they pass'd, at every door
      Stood maids and wives the sight to see;
   Curs bark'd, and bairnies by the score
      Ran bawling loud and merrily,
   But still the bride looks dull and wan;
   She's thinking of her Highlandman.
         But still the bride, &c.


 

   The Lowland laird, in bridegroom's gear,
      Prick'd forth to meet the fair array;
   His eye was bright, his voice was clear,
      And every word was boon and gay.
   Ah! little did he reckon then
   Of bold and burly Highlandmen.
         Ah! little did he reckon, &c.

   The bride she raised her drooping brow,
      And red as crimson turn'd her cheek.—
   What sound is that? The war-pipe now
      Descending from yon broomy peak.
   It sounds like marching of a clan;
   O can it be her Highlandman?
         It sounds like, &c.

   Their bonnets deck'd with heather green,
      Their shoulders broad with tartans bound,
   Their checker'd hose were plainly seen
      Right fleetly moving to the sound.
   Quick beat her heart, within a ken,
   To see the valiant Highlandmen.
         Quick beat her heart, &c.

   Now challenge-shout is heard, and soon
      The bare claymores are flashing bright;
   And off scour'd many a Lowland loon,
      Who ill could brook the fearful sight.
   “The fiend,” quoth they, “from cave and glen
   Has pour'd those stalwart Highlandmen.
         “The fiend,” quoth they, &c.

   Then pistols from their holsters sprang,
      Then wax'd the skirmish fierce and hot,
   Blades clashing fell, and harness rang,
      And loudly bluster'd fire and shot;
   For, sooth to say, the bridegroom then
   Full bravely met the Highlandmen.
         For, sooth to say, &c.

   And so did all his near o' kin,
      As Lowland race such stour may bide:
   But sank, at last, the mingled din,
      And where was then the bonnie bride?
   Ay, ask at those who answer can;
   Ask at the cunning Highlandman.
         Ay, ask at those, &c.

   The bridegroom, in a woeful plight,
      Back to his furnish'd hall has gone,
   Where spread on boards so gaily dight,
      Cold has the wedding banquet grown.
   How changed since break of morning, when
   He thought not of the Highlandmen!
         How changed since, &c.

   And who, upon Benledi's side,
      Beneath his shieling blest and gay,
   Is sitting by that bonnie bride,
      While round them moves the light strathspey?
   It is the flower of all his clan,—
   It is her gallant Highlandman.
         It is the flower, &c.

Re-enter Allen , snapping his fingers, and footing the ground, as he speaks.
Allen.
   I've seen him, sirs; I have had words of him.

 st high.
   Had words of whom?

Allen.
                                            Of the young laird himself.

Omnes.
   Hast thou? and is he coming to the green?

Allen.
   He bade me say he'll join you in the evening.

Omnes.
   And not till then?

Allen.
                                            Some strangers have arrived.
   And I have seen them too: the lady's mounted
   Upon a milk-white nag; and o'er her saddle
   A scarlet cloth is spread, both deep and wide,
   With bobs and fringes deck'd right gallantly;
   And in her riding gear she sits with grace
   That might become the daughter of a chief,
   Ay, or the king himself.

 st high.
   Perhaps it is the Glasgow provost's daughter,
   Who is, as they have said, the very match
   That our old laird is planning for his son.

Allen.
   Ay, he may plan, but love will have its way,—
   Free, fitful love thinks scorn of prudent planning.
   No, young Dunarden went not to the town
   With simple Culloch for his sole attendant,
   To see the provost's daughter.

Bride

 to Allen .
   And so he will not join us till the evening?

Allen.
   No, damsels; but here are ribands for the bride,
   And for you all, which he has sent by me.
   Now they who have the nimblest hands among you,
   Will catch their favourite colours as they fly.
 Pulls out ribands from his pouch, and dances about in a whirling figure to the bottom of the stage, strewing about pieces of ribands, while the girls follow, to catch them as they fall.

 Exeunt.


SCENE II.
The hall in the tower of Dunarden.

Enter Dunarden and Marian.
Dun.

 speaking as they enter .
   In sooth, she well may grace a noble mansion,
   Or chieftain's hall, or palace of a prince,
   Albeit her veins swell not with ancient blood.
   If so much grace and sweetness cannot please him,
   He must be ill to win. And by my faith!
   Perhaps she is this same mysterious lady,
   To whom, as thou suspectest, his late visits,
   So frequent and so long, have been devoted.

Marian.
   Ah, no! I fear another has his heart,—
   His constant heart, whom he , at least, will think
   Fairer than this sweet maid, or all besides.



 
Dun.
   And if it should be so, will nothing please him
   But the top-flower of beauty and perfection?
   The second best, methinks, ay, or the third,
   Where fortune gilds the prize, might suit him well.
   Why dost thou shake thy head?

Marian.
   What might be, and what is, stand far apart,
   When age and youth on the same objects look.

Dun.
   Was I not young, when, of thy grandsire's daughters,
   I chose the fairest, and was plainly told
   Her heart and hand were promised to another?
   But did I then perversely mope and pine?
   No, I trow not: I clear'd my cloudy brow,
   And woo'd the second fairest, thy poor mother.

Marian.
   So will not he.

Dun.
                                            Why so: belike he will not,
   If thou abet his folly, as, methinks,
   Thou art inclined to do.

Marian.
   No, father; not inclined: I shall regret
   As much as you, if any prepossession
   Prevent him from approving this fair maid,
   Who is, indeed, most gentle and engaging.

Dun.
   Out on thy prepossessions! Younger sons,
   Who may be soldiers, sailors, drovers, ay,
   Or tinkers if they will, may choose a mate
   With whom, o'er sea or land, through burgh or city,
   To scour the world. But for the elder born,
   Who must uphold the honours of the race,—
   His ancient race,—he is not thus at liberty
   To please a youthful fancy.

Marian.
   But yet, dear sir, you may be ignorant—

Dun.
   What! am I ignorant? Do I not know
   The world sufficiently to guide and counsel
   Those through whose body my own blood is flowing?
   Not many men have had more opportunity
   To know men and their ways, and I have turn'd it
   To some account; at least I fain would think so.
   I have been thrice in Edinburgh, as thou knowest,
   In London once, in Glasgow many times;
   And I, forsooth, am ignorant!

Marian.
                                            Dear father!
   You would not hear me out: I did not mean
   That you were ignorant of aught belonging
   To worldly wisdom; but his secret heart,
   As I have said before, his prepossessions—

Dun.
   And what has he to do with prepossessions?
   He is, of all men, bound to wed for wealth,
   Since he, with his unceasing liberalities,
   Would bare me to the quick. No tacksman dies,
   But he must have appointed for his widow
   A house, with right of browsing for her goats,
   And pasture for a cow, all free of charge.
   The bedrid carlines, too, and orphan brats,
   Come all on me, through his petitioning;
   And I, God help me! have been weak enough
   To grant such suits too often.

Marian.
   You will not say so on your dying day.

Dun.
   For that, indeed, it may be well enough;
   But for our living days, I needs must say,
   It doth not suit at all.—If he were frugal,
   And would with care lay up what is our own,
   Having some hoarded store, he might more reasonably
   Indulge his prepossessions , as you phrase it.

Marian.
   Nay, be not angry with him.

Dun.
                                            Angry with him!
   Such want of reason would provoke a saint!
   Is he to spend the rents with open hand,
   Stretch'd out to all who need, or all who ask;
   And please himself besides, by an alliance
   With some slight May, who brings but smiles and bloom
   To pay the yearly charges of her state?

Marian.
   We do not know her yet, and cannot say
   That she is poor.

Dun.
                                            But we may shrewdly guess.
   Else why those stealthy visits,—this concealment?
   Oh, 'tis provoking! This, our Provost's daughter,
   Is just the match that would have suited us,—
   That would support our house, and clear our lands,
   And he, forsooth!—I'll cast him from my favour!

Marian.
   I know you will not.

Dun.
                                            Lady Achinmore,
   If he persist, I'll say and do it too.
   His prepossessions truly! mighty plea!
   Supported, too, by Lady Achinmore.


 Walking in wrath to the other end of the hall.
Marian

 aside .
   I'll hold my tongue, and let the storm subside;
   For when he calls me Lady Achinmore,
   Reply is worse than useless.

Dun.

 returning .
   Methinks the lady tarries in her chamber.

Marian.
   To lay aside her travelling attire,
   And put her robe or fashion'd mantua on,
   Requires some time.

Dun.
   And where is Malcolm? Surely he should be
   In readiness, for very decency,
   To bid a stranger lady welcome here.

Marian.
   He will appear ere long, and is, perhaps,
   Attending on her brother.

Dun.
                                            No, he is not.
   I saw young Denison walk forth alone,
   As if to look for him.

Marian.
                                            Here comes the lady.


Enter Alice.
Dun.
   Ah, gentle lady! were I half the man That once I was how many years gone by We shall not say, you should to this poor hold,—
   To these old walls which your fair presence brightens,


 
   A rousing welcome have. But times are changed,
   And fashion now makes all things dull and spiritless.

Alice.
   My welcome, as it is, gives me such pleasure,
   I will not think of what it might have been.
   Your daughter has received me with a kindness
   That has already freed me from restraint,
   And given me courage to express my pleasure.

Marian

 to her .
   Thanks to thee, gentle friend!
   so may I call thee,
   Knowing so well thy worth. Might we retain thee
   Some weeks beneath our roof, then we might boast
   That our poor welcome had not miss'd its aim.

Dun.
   Some weeks! We'll try to turn those weeks to months,
   And then, who knows but that our mountain soil
   May e'en prove warm enough for Lowland flow'r
   Therein to flourish sweetly.

Alice.
   Thanks, noble sir; but we must go tomorrow.

Dun.
   So soon! the daughter of my early friend
   Beneath my roof, seen like a Will o' th' wisp,
   Glancing and vanishing! It must not be.
   Were I but half the man that once I was,
   I'd fight thy stubborn brother hand to hand,
   And glaive to glaive, but he should tarry longer,
   Or leave his charge behind him.

Alice.
   Nay, blame him not: it was his own good will
   That made him from our nearest homeward route,
   Though press'd for time, start these long miles aside,
   To pay his father's friend a passing visit;
   For Malcolm, he believed, was still in Glasgow,
   So rumour said.

Dun.
                                            I thank his courtesy;
   But, if my name be Fergus of Dunarden,
   Neither the morrow, nor next morrow's morrow
   Shall see thee quit my tow'r. I'll go and find him,
   And tell him thou thyself art captive here,
   Though others be in thraldom of thy beauty,
   And shalt not be released.


 Exit.
Marian.
   Thou seest how gallantly old hearts will warm
   At sight of winning youth. He almost woos thee:
   And yet I would not pay a stepdame's duty,
   Where I would rather yield a sister's love.

Alice.
   These words of kindness! Oh, you will undo me
   With so much kindness!


 Bursts into tears.
Marian.
   Dear, gentle creature! Have I given thee pain?
   I have unwittingly—

Alice.
                                            Done nought amiss.
   I have a silly weakness in my nature:
   I can bear frowning coldness or neglect,
   But kindness makes me weep.

Marian.
   And can it be that coldness or neglect
   Should e'er be thine to bear?

Alice.
   Better than I have borne it.

Marian.
   Better than thou! In all your stately city,
   Is there a lady fairer than thyself?

Alice.
   Yes, Lady Achinmore, there is a creature
   Whose beauty changes every other face
   To an unnoticed blank; whose native grace
   Turns dames of courtly guise to household damsels;
   Whose voice of winning sweetness makes the tones
   Of every other voice intruding harshness.

Marian.
   And if there be, conceit will mar it all;
   For too much homage, like the mid-day sun,
   Withers the flower it brightens.

Alice.
   It may be so with others, not with her.

Marian.
   Thou lovest her, then?

Alice.
                                            O, yes! I love her dearly;
   And if I did not, I should hate myself.
   Heed not these tears, nor think, because I weep
   In saying that I love her, aught lurks here,
   Begrudging her felicity. O, no!

Marian

 taking her hands affectionately .
   Sweet Alice! why so moved?

Alice.
   'Tis my infirmity: I am a fool,
   And should not go from home, so to expose
   A mind bereft of all becoming firmness.

Marian

 embracing her .
   Come to my bosom; thou hast but exposed
   That which the more endears thee to my heart;
   And, wert thou firmer, I should love thee less.
   But, hush! let me kiss off those falling tears
   From thy soft cheek. I hear thy brother coming.

Alice.
   Thy brother?

Marian.
   No; thine own,—thy brother Claude.
   Ha! Malcolm, too, is with him! this is well.


Enter Malcolm and Claude , whilst Alice composes herself, and endeavours to look cheerful.
Mal.
   Fair Alice, welcome to our Highland mountains!
   Which, as your brother tells me, you admire,
   In spite of all their lone and silent barrenness.

Alice.
   He tells you true: our fertile Lowland dales,
   With all their crofts and woodlands richly chequer'd,
   Have less variety than their bare sides.

Mal.
   Yes, when fleet shadows of the summer clouds,
   Like stag-hounds on the chase, each other follow
   Along their purple slopes; or when soft haze
   Spreads o'er them its light veil of pearly grey,
   Through the slight rents of which the sunshine steals,
   Showing bright colour'd moss and mottled stones,
   Like spots of polish'd beauty,—they appear
   Objects of varied vision most attractive.

Alice.
   Then, to behold them in their winter guise,
   As I have never done!

Mal.
   You might then see their forms enlarged and dark,


 
   Through the dim drapery of drifted rain,
   Like grim gigantic chieftains in array,
   Bidding defiance to approaching host;
   Or lifting their black shoulders o'er the mass
   Of volumed vapour gather'd round their base,
   Which seem like islands raised above the earth
   In purer regions of the firmament.

Alice.
   And then how sweet the bushy glens between them,
   Where waterfalls shoot from the rocks, and streams
   Course on their wimpled way with brawling din!

Mal.
   Where low-roof'd cots, with curling smoke are seen,
   Each with its little stack of winter fuel,
   And scanty lot of furrow'd corn-land near;
   And groups of hardy imps, who range at will,
   Or paddle in the brook, while bearded goats
   Browse on the rocky knolls, and kids are sporting
   Among the yellow broom.

Claude.
   Pray thee have done, good Malcolm; thou wilt fill
   This girl's fancy with romantic visions,
   Which may, perhaps, make the rich, fertile fields
   Of her own country seem insipid things.

Marian

 to Claude .
   One thing, you would observe, he hasomitted
   In the description of his bonnie glen,—
   The cottage matron, with her cumbrous spade,
   Digging the stubborn soil; and lazy husband
   Stretch'd on the ground, or seated by the door,
   Or on his bagpipe droning some dull dirge.

Mal.
   Well, freely I confess our mountain matrons
   In useful virtues do excel their mates;
   And in what earthly region is it otherwise?

Claude.
   I dare not contradict thee, and be deem'd
   Ungallant for my pains.


Enter a Servant, who delivers a packet to Claude.
Alice.
                                            Is it from Glasgow?
   Is there within the cover aught for me?

Claude.
   There is a letter with thy name upon it.


 Malcolm withdraws some paces from her.
Alice.
   Which, ne'ertheless, thou keepest to thyself,
   With eyes intently fix'd upon the writing.
   Is it a stranger's hand to thee unknown?

Claude

 giving the letter .
   No, not unknown.

Alice.
   It is from Emma Graham
 to Marian 
, and with your leave,
   I'll read it by this window.


 Turns round, and starts upon finding Malcolm close to her.
Marian.
   Why do you start?

Alice.
                                            I knew not he was near me.

Mal.

 in confusion .
   I crave your pardon: 'twas unwittingly;
   I scarcely know myself why I return'd.


 Alice opens the letter, whilst Claude and Malcolm stand gazing anxiously on her as she reads it to herself.
Mal.

 to Alice , who seems to have come to the conclusion .
   Your friends are well, I hope; all's well in Glasgow?

Alice.
   She says a deadly fever rages there,
   And nought is seen along their dismal streets
   But funeral processions; nothing heard
   But death-bells tolling, and the hammer's sound
   Nailing in haste the corse's narrow house.

Mal.

 agitated .
   And she herself amidst this wreck of life!

Alice.
   She is, ere this, removed from the contagion;
   For these concluding lines inform me plainly,
   That she and all her family were prepared
   To leave the town upon the following day
   To that on which her letter has its date.

Mal.

 eagerly .
   I thank thee, Alice.

Claude

 peevishly .
   Wherefore dost thou thank her?

Mal.

 haughtily .
   Whate'er thou hast a right to ask of me
   Shall have its answer.

Marian

 to Claude .
   When Highland pride is touch'd, some lack of courtesy
   Must be excused. You have not from this window
   Admired the falling of our mountain stream.


 Leads him to the bottom of the hall, and detains him there in apparent conversation.
Mal.

 in a softened voice .
   So, gentle Alice, thou'rt in friendship knit
   With Emma Graham! and meet companions are ye!

 Looking closer to the letter, which she still holds open in her hand.
   Forgive me; Lowland ladies far surpass,
   As fair and ready scribes, our mountain maids:
   I ne'er before saw lines by her indited.

Alice

 putting it up hastily; then hesitating, then recovering herself. 
   No; why should I withhold it from thine eye;
   For still the sweet expressions from her pen
   Excel the beauty of its characters.

 Gives it to him.
   Peruse it then
 aside, as she turns from him 
while I peruse myself.

Mal.

 returning the letter, after having read it .
   Thou art in tears, sweet Alice; has thy mind
   Some boding apprehensions for her safety?

Alice.
   No, God forbid! I have a feeble body,
   The worn-out case of a more feeble mind,
   And oft will weep for nothing. Heed me not

Mal.
   No, say not so: thy mind and body both
   Are lovely yoke-fellows, and will together—
   God grant it be so!—hold their prosp'rous course
   For many years.

 Seeing her endeavours to speak. 
   Strive not to answer me;
   This wish, though most sincere, deserves no thanks.


Enter Dunarden , followed by Servants, carrying dishes of meat, &c.
Dun.
   Come, honour'd guests, the first dish of our meal,


 
   Poor though it be, is passing to the board;
   Shall we not follow it? Although, in verity,
   I am ashamed that such a poor reception
   Is offer'd to such friends.

Marian.
   Dear sir, they will forgive what things are lacking,
   The heart's kind cheer not being of the number.

Dun.

 to Alice .
   Had I had timely notice of your coming,
   I had sent messengers for thirty miles,
   Cross moor and mountain, to invite our neighbours;
   And tables had been cover'd in this hall,
   Round which we should have held a merry feast.
   And this same wedding, too, detains the clan:
   So that our wings are clipt on every side.

Alice.
   Your courtesy is great: but surely, sir,
   A merry wedding well may make amends
   For a lost feast, e'en in Dunarden hall.

Dun.
   And so it shall, fair Alice.—Pardon me
   That I should be so bold to name you thus!
   At fall of eve we'll join their merriment;
   And thou shalt be my partner in the dance.

 Taking her hand gallantly.
   I'll have thee all and solely to myself;
   Unless, perhaps, if these old legs should fail,
   Thou wilt accept of this young Highlander

 Pointing to Malcolm.
   To be my substitute.—Come, gentles all!
   By this soft lily hand let me conduct
   The daughter of my old and honour'd friend;
   My trysted partner too. Aha! aha!
 Leading off Alice gaily with a strathspey step.

 Exeunt.


SCENE III.
A lobby or entrance-room, with fire-arms, swords, and fishing-tackle hung on the walls. Servants are seen passing to and fro with plaids and bundles of heath in their hands.

Enter Housekeeper.
House.
   Make all the speed ye may: in the long chamber
   There must be twenty bed-frames quickly set,
   And stuff'd with heather for the tacksmen; ay,
   And for their women, in the further room,
   Fourteen besides, with plaidings for them all.
   The wedding folks have broken up their sport,
   And will be here before we are prepared.


Enter the Butler.
Butler.
   And what are twenty beds, when all the drovers,
   And all the shieling herdsmen from Bengorach,
   Must have a lair provided for the night.

House.
   And who says so?

Butler.
                                            E'en the young laird himself.

House.
   'Tis always so; Dunarden's courtesy,
   With all his honied words, costs far less trouble
   Than young Dunarden's thoughtless kindness doth.
   The foul fiend take them all! Have we got plaids
   For loons like them!

Butler.
   Faith, we at least must try to find them bedding.

House.
   Let each of them find on the green hill sward
   The breadth of his own back, and that, I trow,
   Is bed enough for them. Herdsmen, indeed!

 Several servants coming all about together.
   More plaids! more plaids! we have not yet enow.

Another servant.
   An Elspy says the gentlefolks must have
   Pillows and other gear.

House.
   Out on you! clamouring round me with your wants,
   Like daws about the ruin'd turret! think ye
   That I—I am distracted with you all!

Butler

 aside .
   And with some cups of good Ferntosh besides.

House.
   Howe'er the shieling herdsmen may be lodged,
   I have provided for the Lowland strangers
   Right handsomely.

Butler.
   The bed of state, no doubt, is for the lady,
   And for the gentleman the arras chamber.

House.
   Thou art all wrong: the arras is so ragged,
   And bat holes in the cornice are so rife,
   That Lady Achinmore bade me prepare
   His lodging in the north side of the tower,
   Beside Dunarden's chamber.

Butler.
   They leave the house to-morrow, waiting only
   To take a social breakfast. My best wine
   And good Ferntosh must be upon the table,
   To which the beef, and fish, and old ewe cheese
   Will give a relish. And your pretty playthings
   Of china saucers, with their fairy cups,
   In which a wren could scarcely lay her egg,—
   Your tea-pot, pouring from its slender beak
   Hot water, as it were some precious drug,
   Must be, for fashion's sake, set in array
   To please the Lowland lady.

House.
   Mind thy concerns, and I will look to mine.
   My pretty playthings are in daily use,
   As I hear say, in the great town of Edinburgh;
   And 'tis a delicate and wholesome beverage
   Which they are filled withal. I like, myself,
   To sip a little of it.

Butler.
                                            Dainty dear!
   No doubt thou dost; aught stronger would offend thee.
   Thou wouldst, I think, call rue or wormwood sweet,
   Were it the fashion in your town of Edinburgh.
   But, hark! the bridal folks are at the door;
   We must not parley longer.

 Music without.
   I hear their piper playing the “Good-night.”



 

Enter Allen.
Butler.
   They are at hand, I hear: and have ye had
   A merry evening, Allen?

Allen.
                                            That we have.
   Dunarden danced with that sweet Lowland lady,
   As though it made him twenty years the younger.

House.
   Dunarden! Danced she not with young Dunarden,
   Who is, so says report, her destined husband?

Allen.
   Yes; at the end, for one dull reel or two
   They footed it together. But, believe me,
   If this rich Provost's daughter be not satisfied
   With being woo'd by substitute, which homage
   The old laird offers her abundantly,
   She'll ne'er be lady of this mansion; no,
   Nor of her many, many thousand marks,
   One golden piece enrich Dunarden's house.

House.
   Woe's me! our Malcolm is a wilful youth!
   And Lady Achinmore would dance with Claude?

Allen.
   She danced with him, and with the bridegroom also.

House.
   That, too, would be a match of furtherance
   To the prosperity of our old house.

Butler.
   But that she is a widow, and, I reckon,
   Some years his elder, it might likely be.

House.
   And why should that be such a mighty hindrance?

Allen.
   Fie, butler! dost thou utter, in such presence,
   Disqualifying words of age and widowhood?

House.
   You are mislearn'd and saucy, both of you.—
   But now they are at hand.

SONG
without, of several voices.

   The sun is down, and time gone by,
   The stars are twinkling in the sky,
   Nor torch nor taper longer may
   Eke out a blithe but stinted day;
   The hours have pass'd with stealthy flight,
   We needs must part: good night, good night!

   The bride unto her bower is sent,
   And ribald song and jesting spent;
   The lover's whisper'd words and few
   Have bid the bashful maid adieu;
   The dancing floor is silent quite,
   No foot bounds there: good night, good night!

   The lady in her curtain'd bed,
   The herdsman in his wattled shed,
   The clansmen in the heather'd hall,
   Sweet sleep be with you, one and all!
   We part in hopes of days as bright
   As this gone by: good night, good night!

   Sweet sleep be with us, one and all!
   And if upon its stillness fall
   The visions of a busy brain,
   We'll have our pleasure o'er again,
   To warm the heart, to charm the sight,
   Gay dreams to all! good night, good night!
House.
   We've listened here too long: go all of you
   And get the rooms prepared! My head's distracted!


 Exeunt all, different ways.
SCENE IV.
A bed-chamber.

Enter Alice and Marian , with a Servant before them, carrying lights.
Marian.
   You must be tired with all this noisy merriment
   So closely following a lengthen'd journey.

Alice.
   To be among the happy and the kind
   Keeps weariness at bay; and yet I own
   I shall be glad to rest.

Marian.
   And may you find it, sound and undisturb'd!
   There is among our household damsels here,
   A humble friend of yours, the child of one
   Who was your father's servant.

Alice.
   Ha! little Jessie, once my playfellow,
   And since well known to me, as the attendant
   Of a relation, in whose house I found her,
   Some two years past: a gentle, faithful creature.

Marian.
   The same, she will attend upon you gladly,
   And do what you require. See, here she is.


Enter Jessie.
Alice.
   Jessie, my old acquaintance! I am glad
   To find thee thus, domesticated happily
   In such a home. I hope thou hast been well,
   Since I last met with thee.

Jessie.
                                            I thank you, madam;
   I am right well; and, were I otherwise,
   To see you here would make me well again,

Marian

 to Alice .
   The greatest kindness I can show thee now
   Is to retire, and leave thee to prepare
   For what thou needst so much.

 Kissing her.
   May sweet sound sleep refresh thee! Oh! it grieves me
   To think that we must part with thee so soon;
   And that ye are determined to return
   To that infected city.

Alice.
   Be not afraid for us. We shall pass through it,
   And only tarry for an hour or two.
   Good night, and thanks for all your gentle kindness!
   Thanks, in few words, but from my inmost heart!

 Exit Marian.


 
   And thou art here, good Jessie. I am glad,—
   Right glad to see thee; but I'm tired and spent,
   And take it not unkindly cannot speak
   As I was wont to do.


 Throws herself into a chair, whilst Jessie begins to uncoil her hair, and take out the ornaments.
Jessie.
   I will prepare you for your bed, dear madam,
   As quickly as I can. To-morrow morning
   Your strength and spirits too will be restored.

Alice.
   Thou'rt a good creature. Dost thou still remember
   The pretty songs thou used to sing so sweetly?

SONG.
Jessie singing gaily.

   My heart is light, my limbs are light,
      My purse is light, my dear;
   Yet follow me, my maiden bright,
      In faith! thou needst not fear.

   The wallet on a rover's back
      Is scanty dower for thee,
   But we shall have what lordies lack
      For all their golden fee.

   The plume upon my bonnet bound,
      And broadsword by my side,
   We'll follow to the war-pipe's sound,
      With fortune for our guide.

   Light are my limbs, my purse, my heart,
      Yet follow me, my dear;
   Bid Care good-bye, with kinsfolk part;
      In faith! thou needst not fear.
Alice.
   I thank thee: that was once a favourite song.
   I know not how it was; I liked it then
   For the gay reckless spirit of the tune.
   But there is one which I remember well,
   One my poor aunt was wont to bid thee sing;
   Let me have that, I pray thee.

SONG.
   They who may tell love's wistful tale,
      Of half its cares are lighten'd;
   Their bark is tacking to the gale,
      The sever'd cloud is brighten'd.

   Love like the silent stream is found
      Beneath the willows lurking,
   The deeper, that it hath no sound
      To tell its ceaseless working.

   Submit, my heart; thy lot is cast,
      I feel its inward token;
   I feel this mis'ry will not last,
      Yet last till thou art broken.
Alice.
   Thou singest sweetly, ay, and sadly too,
   Even as it should be sung. I thank thee, Jessie.

Jessie

 after having entirely undone her hair, and taken the fastenings from other parts of her dress .
   Now, madam, let me fetch your gown and coif.

Alice.
   I want no further service, my good Jessie,
   I'll do the rest myself: and so, good night;
   I shall be soon in bed. Good night, and thanks.

Jessie.
   Not yet good night; I will return again,
   And take away the light.

Alice.
   Well; as thou wilt: but leave me for a while.

 Exit Jessie.
   This day, with all its trials, is at length
   Come to an end. My wrung and wrestling heart!
   How is it with thee now? Thy fond delusions
   Lie strew'd and broken round thee, like the wrecks
   Of western clouds when the bright sun is set.
   We look upon them glowing in his blaze,
   And sloping wood, and purple promontory,
   And castled rock distinctly charm the eye:
   What now remains but a few streaky fragments
   Of melting vapour, cold and colourless?

 After a thoughtful pause.
   There's rest when hope is gone—there should be rest.
   And when I think of her who is the cause,
   Should I complain? To be preferr'd to her!
   Preferr'd to Emma Graham, whom I myself
   Cannot behold but with an admiration
   That sinks into the heart, and in the fancy
   Goes hand in hand with every gentle virtue
   That woman may possess or man desire!—
   The thought was childish imbecility.
   Away, away! I will not weep for this.
   Heaven granting me the grace for which I'll pray
   Humbly and earnestly, I shall recover
   From this sad state of weakness. If she love him,
   She'll make him happier far than I could do;
   And if she love him not, there is good cause
   That I should pity him; not selfishly
   On my own misery dwell.—Ay, this should be;
   But will it be?—Oh, these rebellious tears!


 Covering her face with her hands, and throwing herself back in her chair, in a state of abandonment.

Enter, by the other end of the chamber, the phantom of a beautiful young woman, which advances a few paces, and then remains still.
Alice

 raising her face .
   Who's there?—Is there true vision in mine eyes?

 Rising quickly, and going with open arms towards the phantom.
   Dear Emma! dear, dear Emma! how is this,
   That thou art here, unlook'd for at this hour,
   So many miles from home? Alas! that face
   Of ghastly paleness, and that alter'd look
   Of sad solemnity!—Speak to me quickly;


 
   I dare approach no nearer, till I hear
   Words of thy natural voice. Art thou alive?

Phantom.
   A term, short as the passing of a thought,
   Hath brought me from the chamber where my friends
   Are now lamenting round my lifeless body.

Alice.
   And 'tis thy spirit which before mine eyes
   Thy body's semblance wears: and thou art nothing
   That mortal hands may touch or arms encircle!
   O look not on me with that fixed look!
   Thou lovest me still, else thou hadst not been here,
   And yet I fear thee.

Phantom.
                                            Fear me not, dear Alice!
   I yearn'd to look upon thee ere I pass
   That gulf which parts the living from the dead:
   And I have words to utter which thine ear
   Must listen to, thy mind retain distinctly.

Alice.
   Say what thou wilt; thou art a blessed spirit.
   And canst not do me harm.—
   I know it well: but let thy words be few;
   The fears of nature are increasing on me.

 Bending one knee to the ground.
   O God! Lord of all beings, dead and living!
   Strengthen and keep me in this awful hour!

Phantom.
   And to thy fervent prayer I say, Amen.
   Let this assure thee, that, though diff'rent natures
   Invest us now, we are the children still
   Of one great Parent; thou in mortal weeds
   Of flesh and blood; I in a state inexplicable
   To human comprehension.—Hear my words.

Alice.
   I listen most intently.

Phantom.
   The room in which I died, hath a recess
   Conceal'd behind the arras, long disused
   And now forgotten; in it stands a casket,
   The clam shell of our house is traced upon it;
   Open, and read the paper therein lodged.
   When my poor body is to earth committed,
   Do this without delay. And now, farewell!
   I must depart.

Alice.
   Ah! whither, dearest Emma? Will a moment
   Transport thee to heaven's court of blessedness,
   To ecstasy and glory?

Phantom.
   These are presumptuous words. My place, appointed
   In mercy to a weak and sinful creature,
   I soon shall know. Farewell, till we shall meet,
   From sin, and fear, and doubt, released for ever!


 Exit.

 Alice stands trembling and gazing, as the phantom disappears, and then falls on the ground in a swoon. Presently re-enter Jessie.
Jessie.
   Mercy upon us! lying on the ground!
   Life is not gone; God grant it be not so!
   Lady, dear lady! No; she does not hear.


 Endeavours in vain to raise her, then runs off in great alarm, and is heard without, knocking and calling at the door of another chamber.

 Without. 
   Open the door! Rise, Lady Achinmore.

Marian

 without .
   I am not yet undress'd: what is the matter?

Jessie

 without .
   Come to the lady's chamber: follow me.

Mal.

 without, opening the door of his apartment .
   What has befallen? Is any one unwell?


Re-enter Jessie , followed by Marian , who both run to Alice , raising her from the floor, and one supporting her head, while the other chafes her temples and the palms of her hands, &c.
Marian.
   Support her drooping head, while from my closet
   I fetch some water, and restoring drugs,
   Whose potent smell revives suspended life.

Mal.

 looking in upon them from the door .
   O leave her not! I'll find whate'er is wanting.


 Exit.
Marian.
   There is a little motion of her lip;
   Her bosom heaves: thank God! life is not fled.
   How long hadst thou been absent from the room?

Jessie.
   Some little time; and thought, on my return,
   To find her gone to bed.

Marian.
   How was she when thou leftst her?

Jessie.
   She was well then.

Marian.
                                            It hath been very sudden.


Re-enter Malcolm , with phials, &c.
Mal.

 applying herbs to her nostrils, while Marian pours out essence from the phial, and rubs her temples and hands .
   Life is returning; she is laid uneasily;
   Let me support her on a stronger arm.

 Taking her from Marian , and supporting her.
   There's motion on her lips, and on her eyelids.
   Her eyes begin, through their soft raven lashes,
   To peer like dew-drops from the harebell's core,
   As the warm air of day by slow degrees
   The closed leaves gently severs.—Yes; she moves.
   How art thou now, sweet Alice?

Marian.
   See, she looks up, and gazes on us too;
   But, oh, how strangely!

Mal.
   Why do her eyes thus wander round the chamber?

 To Alice. 
   Whom dost thou seek for, Alice?

Alice.
   She's gone; I need not look; a mortal eye
   Shall never, never look on her again.

 A peal of thunder heard.
   Hear ye that sound? She is upon her way.

Marian.
   What does she mean? It was a sultry night,
   And threaten'd storm and lightning.

Mal.

 to Alice .
   Thou'st been asleep, and scarcely yet art waking,
   Thy fancy is still busied with its dream.



 
Alice

 raising herself more, and looking towards the place where the phantom disappeared .
   It was no dream: upon that spot it stood;
   I saw it,—saw it for a lengthen'd time,—
   Saw it distinctively.

Mal.
                                            Whom didst thou see?
   No living creature could have enter'd here.

Alice.
   O would that it had been a living creature!
   Her beauty was the beauty of a corse
   Newly composed in death; yet her dark eyes
   Were open, gazing wistfully upon me.

Mal.

 hastily withdrawing his arms from her, and clasping his hands together in agony .
   Thou hast seen Emma Graham!

Alice

 rousing herself .
   Is Malcolm here? I am confused,—bewilder'd;
   I know not what I've seen, or what I've said:
   Perhaps it was a dream.

Mal.
                                            It was no dream;
   Or if it was, 'twas one of sad import.
   Oh, if it be!—there is distraction in it.


 Tossing his arms, &c.
Marian.
   Dear brother! such wild gestures of despair
   For the mere shapings of a sleepy brain!

Mal.
   It was not sleep from which we have revived her.

Marian.
   And grant it were not, swooning, I've been told,
   Will sometimes have its dream as well as sleep.

Alice.
   I was not well; I have been long unwell;
   Weakness and wretchedness disturb the brain;
   Perhaps it was the vision of a swoon.
   Be not so miserable, gentle Malcolm!
   O that this vision did foretell my death,
   If she were well and happy!

Mal.
   Forgive me, dearest Alice! O, forgive me!
   When paining thee, I'm hateful to myself.


 Taking both her hands, which he presses to his lips.
Marian.
   Leave us, dear brother! go to thine apartment.

Mal.
   I'll go where yearning nature urges me.

 Going, then returning again to Alice.
   And didst thou hear her voice?


Enter Claude.
Claude.
   Is Alice well? I heard a busy noise.
   How art thou, sister?

Alice.
                                            I have had a swoon,
   But am recover'd from it. Go to rest.

 Aside to Marian and Malcolm.
   Say nothing of the vision. O, be silent!

Mal.

 aside to himself, as he goes off .
   Is he so much concern'd? No, no, he is not:
   He does not,—cannot feel what tortures me.

Claude.
   Dost thou avoid me, Malcolm? Dost thou think
   That kindness to my sister can offend me?

Mal.
   I've other thoughts, which do no wrong to thee,
   And owe thee no account.


 Exit.
Claude

 aside .
   He is offended.

 Aloud to Marian. 
   Thanks to you, dear madam!
   For your kind care of Alice. Rest, I hope,
   Will perfectly restore her. The fatigue
   Of her long journey, and the evening pastime
   Has been too much for one so delicate.

 To Alice. 
   Undress and go to bed, poor harass'd creature!
   I trust to-morrow thou wilt wake refresh'd.

Alice.
   I hope so too, dear Claude; and so good night.
   Remain no longer here.
 Exit Claude. 
I'm glad he's gone.

 Apeal of thunder as before.
   That awful sound again! she's on her way:
   But storm or thunderbolt can do no harm
   To disembodied spirits.

Marian.
   I may not leave thee here, my gentle friend;
   In my apartment thou shalt pass the night.
   Come then with me: I dare not leave thee here,
   Where, sleeping or awake, thou hast received
   Some painful shock—Rise: lean upon my arm.


 Exeunt.
SCENE V.
A rudely paved court, with a low building in front. The stage perfectly dark, and thunder heard at a distance.

Enter Malcolm , who goes to the door of the building, and knocks.
Mal.
   Ho! Culloch! art thou waking? Rouse thee, Culloch!
   I hear him snoring in his heavy sleep,
   Press'd with the glutton feasting of the day.

 Knocking louder than before.
   Canst thou not hear? Holla! ho! rouse thee, Culloch!
   The heavy sluggard! Ha! he's stirring now.


 Laying his ear close to the door.
Cul.

 within .
   Who's there?

Mal.
                        It is thy master.

Cul.
                                            What is wanted?
   It is not morning yet.

Mal.
                                            That drawling voice!
   He is not yet awake.
Very loud. 
Rise, man, immediately:
   Open the door, and do what I desire thee.

 To himself, after a short pause.
   Six hours upon my gallant steed will end
   This agony of doubt.—I'll know my fate—
   Joy or despair.—He is asleep again.

 Knocking as before.
   Make haste, make haste, I say! inert and sluggish!


 
   O that, like spirits, on the tempest borne,
   The transit could be made! Alas! alas!
   If what I fear hath happen'd, speed or stillness,
   Or day or midnight,—every circumstance
   Of mortal being will to me be nothing.
   Not ready yet!—Ha! now I see the light.

 Light seen from the window.
   Six hours of my brave steed, and if my fears
   Are then confirm'd—forgive me, noble creature!
   We'll lay our burdens down and die together.
Enter Culloch slowly from the building, rubbing his eyes with one hand, and holding a candle in the other.

   Haste, tardy creature! art thou sleeping still?

Cul.
   What is your honour's will? O hone! O hone!
   It is a murky night.

Mal.
                                            I know it is.
   Unlock the stable door, and saddle quickly
   My gallant Oscar.


 Thunder again.
Cul.
                                            Does your honour hear it?

Mal.
   Hear what?

Cul.
                                            The thunder growling o'er Benmore:
   And that was lightning too that flared so fleetly:
   The welkin's black as pitch.

Mal.
   And let it growl; and be the welkin pall'd
   In sackcloth! To the spot where I am going
   We'll find the way by instinct.—Linger not:
   Do what I have desired thee instantly.

Cul.
   Ay, ay! the saddle upon Oscar's back.
   The bran new saddle would your honour have?

Mal.
   Yes, fool, and set about it instantly.

 Exit Culloch.
   These dark and heavy bodings of my mind
   Come from no natural bent of apprehension.
   It must be so. Yet, be it dream or vision,
   Unmeaning chance, or preternatural notice,
   As oft hath been vouchsafed, if living seers
   Or old tradition lie not,—this uncertainty
   Ere morning dawn would drive my brain distracted,
   Were I inactively to wait for day;
   Therefore, to horse!

 Thunder louder than before.
   That sound is in accordance with the storm
   In this perturbed breast. Is it not ominous
   Of that which soon shall strike me to the dust,
   A blasted lonely remnant?—
   Methinks he should ere this—time flies apace;
   The listless sluggard must be urged to hasten
   His so unwilling task.


 Exit hastily.
ACT II. SCENE I.
The cross of Glasgow. A great crowd of people are discovered, and bells heard tolling occasionally from the neighbouring churches.
 st crowd.
   Ah! woe is me! so bonnie and so young!
   Of all that death hath ta'en in this fell ravage,
   None hath he ta'en that seem'd so ill to suit
   The coffin and the mould. Ah! woe is me!

 d crowd.
   Ay, neighbour, she was one mark'd from them all.
   Though we have many fair and gracious ladies,
   We had not one who could be pair'd with her:
   The bonniest lass in all the west of Scotland.

 st crowd.
   Ay, thou mayst say, the bonniest and the best.

 d crowd.
   Nay, softly, David! for the point of goodness,
   That is a matter, on her burial day,
   We may not question; yet, if it be true—

 st crowd.
   If it be true! It is not: nought is true
   That can throw speck or spot upon her virtue.

 st crowd woman

 to  st crowd .
   Be not so angry, man; my husband means
   Against her maiden virtue no reproach,
   E'en if her faith was papishly inclined.

 st crowd.
   She was no Papish; I'll take oath upon it.
   The cloven foot of Satan in my shoe
   Is at this point of time as surely buckled,
   As that she was aught but a pure believer—
   A good and godly lady.

 st crowd woman.
   That gentleman, so brave and soldierly,
   Who lately has return'd from foreign wars,
   Is a rank Romanist, and has been oft
   Received by her. But, Lord preserve us all!
   We, by God's grace, may sit by Satan's side,—
   Ay, on the self-same settle, yet the while,
   Be ne'er one whit the worse.

 d crowd.
   And I should guess—

 d crowd.
   Hist, hist! the funeral's coming:
   I hear the heavy wheels, and o'er the top
   Of all those cluster'd heads I see the feathers,—
   The snow-white feathers of the high-coped hearse
   Move slowly. Woe the day! oh, woe the day!
   How changed her state! She was on milk-white steed
   Mounted right gallantly, with cap and plume,
   When I beheld her last.

Voice

 without .
   Make way, good folks, and let the ladies pass.

 d crowd

 to him without .
   None can pass here on horseback.

Voice

 without .
   It is the Provost's family: make way.



 
 d crowd

 as before .
   An 'twere the king's, they must dismount, I trow,
   Or wait till the procession be gone by.


Enter Alice, Marian , and Claude.
Claude

 to crowd .
   What makes so great a concourse; and those bells
   To toll so dismally? Whose funeral
   Are ye convened to see?

 st crowd.
   Ah, sir! the fairest lady of the place.
   I warrant you have seen her many a time;
   They call'd her Emma Graham.

Claude.
   It cannot be! What didst thou call her? Speak;
   Repeat her name.

 st crowd.
   Her name is Emma Graham; her father is—

Claude.
   No more! no more! too well I comprehend it.
   And death hath dealt his blow on what was life's
   Completest, dearest, best.


 Covers his face with his cloak.
Marian

 turning to Alice , and supporting her .
   Dear Alice, thou art pale, and faint, and ill;
   Lean upon me, my friend.

Alice.
   Think not of me: poor Claude! my heart-struck brother!
   His wound is deep and sudden: for this stroke
   I was prepared.

Voices

 without .
   Stand back; stand closer: it is now at hand.


 A funeral procession crosses the stage: the mourners following the hearse on foot.
 st crowd.
   Ah! never corse was follow'd to the grave
   With deeper sorrow!

 st crowd woman.
   Ay, tears are following tears down manly cheeks,
   As gouts fall in Saint Mungo's dripping aisle,
   Near which the grave is dug that shall receive her.

 st crowd.
   That is her grey-hair'd father, so bow'd down;
   And those her brothers walking by his side.

 d crowd.
   Then all the kindred walking, two and two.

 d crowd.
   But who is he that follows after all,
   In mourner's cloak so muffled to the eyes?
   He walks alone, not mated like the rest;
   And yet, methinks, his gait and motion say
   The greatest weight of grief falls to his share.

Claude.
   God knows who hath the greatest share! Not he.


 Pushing eagerly through the crowd.
Alice.
   Where goest thou, Claude?


 Endeavouring to hold him.
Claude.
   Prevent me not. Shall mourning weeds alone
   Have privilege, and sorrow be debarr'd.


 Exit hastily after the funeral, and the crowd disperses different ways , Alice, Marian , and their servants alone occupying the front of the stage.
Marian.
   Dear Alice! how thou tremblest every limb,
   As in an ague fit!

Alice.
                                            It was no dream;
   It was no strong delusion of the fancy.

Marian.
   This is indeed an awful confirmation.
   But stay no longer here: go to thy home;
   Thou hast great need of rest.

Alice.
                                            I have more need,
   Within my closet, on my bended knees,
   To pray for mercy on my sinful self,
   And those to me most dear,—poor sinners all.
   This is a sad and awful visitation.

Marian.
   But didst thou not expect to find it so?
   I thought thou wast prepared.

Alice.
                                            I thought so too;
   But certainty makes previous expectation
   Seem, by comparison, a state of hope.

Marian.
   We now are free to hold upon our way.
   Let us proceed: come on with me, dear Alice!


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
The house of the provost, and the apartment of Claude , who enters, followed by Crawford , and throws himself back into a chair with the action of deep distress.
Claude.
   Follow me not, my friend; it is in vain
   That friendly soothing would assuage my grief.

Craw.
   Grieve not for that which is, indeed, most grievous,
   Beyond all measure.

Claude.
                                            Can we measure grief,
   And say, so much of it shall be my portion,
   And only this? A prudent, lesson'd sorrow,
   Usurps the name it bears.—She was the light
   That brighten'd every object; made this world
   A place worth living in. This beauteous flame
   Hath in the socket sunk: I am in darkness,
   And no returning ray shall cheer my sight.
   This earth, and every thing that it contains,
   Is a dull blank around me.

Craw.
                                            Say not so!
   It grieves my heart to hear thee. Say not so.

Claude.
   I will not grieve thee then; I'll hold my tongue;
   But shall I feel the less?—Oh, had she lived!

Craw.
   Perhaps she had but caused thee greater sorrow;
   For how wouldst thou have brook'd to see her hand,
   Had it so been, bestow'd upon another?

Claude.
   Why should I entertain a thought so painful?

 Raising his head proudly, after a thoughtful pause.
   Yes, I can entertain it, and believe
   That, even as another's, it were happiness


 
   To see her yet alive; to see her still
   Looking as never eyes but hers did look;
   Speaking such words as she alone could speak,
   Whose soften'd sounds thrill'd through the nerves, and dwelt,
   When heard no more, on the delighted fancy,
   Like chanted sweetness!—All is now extinct!—
   Like some base thing, unmeet for mortal eye,
   The sod hath cover'd all.

 After a thoughtful pause.
   Hath cover'd all!

Craw.
   Dear Claude! why wilt thou dwell on things so dismal?
   Let me read to thee from some pious book;
   Wilt thou permit me?

 He remains silent and thoughtful.
   Dost thou hear me, Claude?

Claude

 muttering to himself, without attending to Crawford .
   The sexton has the key; and if he had not,
   The wall may yet be clear'd.—
   The banded mourners scatter to their homes,
   Where kinsfolk meet, and social hearths blaze bright,
   And leave the grave in midnight loneliness!
   But should it be?

Craw.

 listening to him .
                                            I understand these words.
   But if he go, he shall not go alone.


Enter a Servant.
Claude

 impatiently .
   What brings thee here?

Serv.
   A gentleman desires to see you, sir.

Claude.
   Tell him I am gone forth.—Such ill-timed visits!
   Is the sore heart a sear'd and harden'd thing
   For every fool to handle?


 Exit.
Craw.
   I'll follow him: he should not be alone.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A large room, with rich furniture, and the walls hung with pictures.

Enter the Provost and Marian , by different doors.
Provost.
   How is poor Alice?

Marian.
                                            She is more composed;
   For tears have flow'd uncheck'd, and have relieved her.
   I have persuaded her to take an hour
   Of needful rest upon her bed; and Jessie,
   That kindly creature, watches her the while.

Provost.
   Ay, that is right. And now, my right good lady,
   Let me in plain but grateful words repeat,
   That your great kindness, leaving thus your home,
   And taking such a journey for the comfort
   Of my poor child, is felt by me most truly,
   As it deserves. May God reward you for it!

Marian.
   I will not, sir, receive such thanks unqualified;
   They are not due to me. Regard for Alice,—
   And who that knows her feels not such regard,—
   Was closely blended with another motive,
   When I determined on this sudden journey.

Provost.
   Another motive!

Marian.
                                            Has not Claude inform'd you
   That Malcolm left Dunarden secretly,
   The night before we did ourselves set forth?

Provost.
   He has not. Ha! and wot you where he went?

Marian.
   I wot not, but I guess: and it was he,
   As I am almost confident, who walk'd
   The last of all the mourners, by himself,
   In this day's sad procession.

Provost

 pulling a letter hastily from his pocket .
   Madam, sit down; I'll cast mine eyes again
   O'er this your father's letter. Pray sit down!
   I may not see you thus.

 Setting a chair with much courtesy, and obliging her to sit, whilst he goes aside and reads a letter earnestly. He then returns to her.
   My friend has many words of courtesy;
   It is his habit; but subtracting from them
   The plain unvarnish'd sense, and thereto adding
   What, from this secret journey of your brother,
   May be inferr'd,—the real truth is this—
   At least it so appears to my poor reason—

 Preventing her as she rises from her seat.
   Nay, sit, I pray you, Lady Achinmore;
   We'll talk this matter over thoroughly,
   And leave no bashful doubts hid in a corner,
   For lack of honest courage to produce them.


 Sits down by her.
Marian.
   Proceed, good sir, I listen earnestly.

Provost.
   As it appears to me, the truth is this,
   That Malcolm, whom your father doth admit,
   Albeit a great admirer of my daughter,
   To be at present somewhat disinclined
   To give up youthful liberty so early,
   As he from more acquaintance with her virtues
   Ere long will of his own accord desire,—

 Pointing to the letter 
   —so he expresses it.

Marian.
   And with sincerity.

Provost.
                                            Well, grant it, lady!
   The truth doth ne'ertheless appear to be,
   That this young gallant, Malcolm of Dunarden,
   With all her virtues, loves not Alice Denison,
   And loves another.

Marian.
                                            Rather say, hath loved.

Provost.
   I'll not unsay my words. His heart is with her,
   Low as she lies: and she who won his heart
   From such a maid as Alice Denison,
   Will keep it too, e'en in her shroud. No, no!
   We've spread our vaunting sails against the wind,
   And cannot reach our port but with such peril
   As will o'ermatch the vantage.



 
Marian.
                                            Say not so.
   Time will make all things as we wish to have them.

Provost.
   Time works rare changes, which they may abide
   Who are intent upon them. Shall I carry
   My vessel where her cargo is not wanted?—
   Tobacco to th' Antipodes, and wait
   Till they have learn'd to use and relish it?—
   Shall I do this, when other marts are near
   With open harbours ready to receive her?

Marian.
   Dear sir, you must not think I will assent
   To what would mar the long and cherish'd wish
   Of me and mine. And we had fondly hoped
   That you had been desirous of this union
   Between our families.

Provost.
   Your father won my friendship years ago,
   When with his goodly mien and belted plaid,
   His merry courtesy and stately step,
   He moved amongst our burghers at the Cross,
   As though he had been chieftain o'er us all;
   And I have since enjoy'd his hospitality,
   In his proud mountain hold.

Marian.
   I recollect it: proud and glad he was
   Of such a guest.

Provost.
                                            Dost thou? Ay, then it was,
   That, seeing his fair stripling by his side—
   A graceful creature, full of honest sense
   And manly courage—I did like the notion,
   That Alice, then a little skipping child,
   With years before her still to play about me,
   Should in some future time become the lady
   Of that young Highland chief. But years bring thoughts
   Of a more sober and domestic hue.
   Why should I covet distant vanities,
   And banish from my sight its dearest object?

 Rising from his chair. 
   Have you observed those pictures?

Marian

 rising also .
   I have. They are the portraits of your parents:
   Their features bear resemblance to your own.

Provost.
   My mother's do: and look at her, dear madam!
   With all the bravery of that satin dress
   Clasp'd up with jewels, and those roses stuck
   Amongst her braided hair, she was the daughter
   And sober heiress of a saving burgher,
   Whose hoarded pelf in my brave father's hands
   Raised such industrious stir in this good city,
   As changed her from a haunt of listless sluggards
   To the fair town she is. What need have I
   To eke my consequence with foreign matches?
   Alice shall wed, I hope, some prosperous merchant,
   And live contentedly, my next door neighbour,
   With all her imps about her.

Marian.
   Wed whom she may, I hope she will be happy.

Provost.
   I do believe that is your hearty wish:
   And having plainly told you what I think
   Of this projected match, as it concerns
   My daughter and myself,—I will proceed
   To that which may concern my ancient friend.
   Should any mortgage press on his estate,
   Or any purchase of adjoining lands
   Make money a desired object with him,
   He need but speak the word; at easy int'rest
   He shall receive what sums he may require,
   And need not fear that I shall e'er distress him
   With hard ill-timed demands. In faith, he need not!

Marian.
   Dear sir, he knows full well your gen'rous heart
   Hath for its minister a liberal hand:
   In truth, he would not fear to be your debtor.

Provost.
   Not all the rum and sugar of Jamaica,
   In one huge warehouse stored, should make me press him,
   Though apt occasion offer'd e'er so temptingly.
   Then why should Malcolm bend his youthful neck
   To wedlock's yoke for sordid purposes?
   The boy shall be my friend; and when his mind
   Is free to think upon another love,
   I'll guide him to a very comely lady—
   Yea, more than one, that he may have a choice—
   Who may prove both a match of love and profit;
   But hear you plainly, not to Alice Denison.

Marian.
   Oh, you are kind and noble! but my father—

Provost.
   Say nought for him; he'll answer for himself:
   And through his maze of friendly compliments,
   I'll trace at last his veritable thoughts.

 Taking her hand kindly.
   Now, having thus so plainly told my mind,
   Look on me as a man to whom again
   You may as freely speak.

Marian.
                                            And so I will:
   The happiness of one, dear to us both,
   Requires that I should do it.

Provost

 surprised .
   How so? is it of Alice you would speak?

Marian.
   Yes, but another time; for here comes Jessie.
Enter Jessie.

 To Jessie. 
How is she now? I hope she is asleep.

Jessie.
   She has not slept, but lies composed and easy,
   And wishes now to see you.


 Exit Marian.
Provost.
   How art thou, Jessie?

Jessie.
                                            Well, an' please your honour.

Provost.
   I hear thou hast become a Highland lass;
   But, if thou really like the Lowlands better,
   Thy native country, tell me honestly:
   I'll make thy husband, whomsoe'er thou choose,
   A freeman of this town. If he have brains,
   And some few marks beside, he'll thrive upon it.

Jessie.
   I thank you, sir: his marks are few indeed.



 
Provost.
   Well, never mind; let us but have the brains,
   And we will make the best of it.—Poor Jessie!
   I well remember thee a barefoot girl,
   With all thy yellow hair bound in a snood:
   Thy father too.

Jessie.
                                            Do you remember him?

Provost.
   Yes, Saunders Fairlie. Better man than Saunders
   In factory or warehouse never bustled.


Enter Servant.
Provost.
   What is the matter, Archy? On thy face
   Thou wearst a curious grin: what is the matter?

Serv.
   The baillie bid me to inform your honour,
   The country hucksters and the market wives
   Have quarrell'd, and are now at deadly strife,
   With all the brats and schoolboys of the town
   Shouting and bawling round them.

Provost.
   Good sooth! whene'er those wives with hands and tongue
   Join in the fray, the matter must be look'd to.
   I will be with them soon.

 Exit servant.
   To think now of those creatures!
   E'en at the time when death is in the city
   Doing his awful work, and our sad streets
   Blacken'd with funerals, that they must quarrel
   About their worldly fractions! Woe is me!
   For all our preachings and our Sabbath worship,
   We are, I fear, but an ungodly race.
Enter another Servant.

   And what has brought thee, too?

Serv.
   There is a woman come from Anderston,
   Whose neighbour, on pretence of some false debt,
   Has pounded her milch cow,—her only cow.

Provost.
   Is that a case to occupy my time?
   Let her go with it to the younger baillie.

Serv.
   I told her so, your honour, but she weeps,
   And says the younger baillie is so proud,
   She dare not speak to him.

Provost.
   Poor simpleton! Well, then, I needs must see her.
Re-enter  st Servant.

   Tut! here again! What is the matter now?

 st serv.
   A servant all cross'd o'er wi' livery lace,
   As proud and grand as any trumpeter,
   Is straight from Blantyre come, and says, my lord
   Would greatly be obliged, if that your honour
   Would put off hearing of that suit to-morrow,
   As he must go to Edinburgh.

Provost.
                                            Tell the messenger
   To give my humble service to his lordship,
   And say, I could not, but with great injustice
   To the complaining party, grant delay,
   Who, being poor, should not be further burden'd
   With more attendance; I will therefore hear
   The cause to-morrow, at the hour appointed.
Exit  st, and re-enter  d Servant.

   Still more demands! For what foul sin of mine
   Was I promoted to this dignity?
   From morn till eve, there is no peace for me.


 Exit Provost, speaking to the servants as they go out.
SCENE IV.
Before the walls of a churchyard, a narrow iron gate at the bottom of the stage, behind which the gleaming of a torch is faintly seen; the front of the stage entirely dark. Solemn music is heard, as the scene opens.

Enter a Sexton, with keys, followed by Claude and Crawford.
Claude.
   Music! and from the spot! what may it be?

Sexton.
   Leave was requested that a solemn dirge
   Should be this night sung by some grave; but whose,
   Or e'en by whom requested, I am ignorant.
   Some Papist, like enough: but what of that?

Craw.

 to sexton .
   How many graves thou'st made in one short week!
   Thou hast been busy in thy sad vocation.

Sexton.
   I have, good sooth, and knew it would be so,
   A month before the fell disease began.

Craw.
   How knew it?

Sexton.
                                            He, the sighted man from Skye,
   Was in the town; and, at the crowded cross,
   Fell into strong convulsions, at the sight
   Which there appear'd to him.

Craw.
                                            What did he see?

Sexton.
   Merchants, and lairds, and deacons, making bargains,
   And setting trystes, and joking carelessly,
   Swathed in their shrouds; some to the very chin,
   Some breast-high, others only to the loins.
   It was a dismal, an appalling sight;
   And when I heard of it, I knew right well
   My busy time was coming.

Claude

 to sexton, impatiently .
   Didst thou say
   That leave has been requested for a dirge
   To be this night sung by some Papist's grave?

Sexton.
   Papist or not I cannot surely say,
   I ask'd no questions.

Craw.
                                            Having cause, no doubt,
   To be well satisfied no harm would ensue.

Sexton.
   No harm. In this retired nook it cannot
   Annoy the living; and for the departed,
   Nought can disturb their rest.



 
Craw.
   Hast thou not heard of restless souls returning?
   Perhaps thou'st seen it, during thirty years
   In which thou hast been sexton of this parish.

Sexton.
   In all that time I ne'er could say with certainty
   That aught of such a nature pass'd before me;
   But I have seen uncertain shadows move
   As 'twere confusedly, and heard strange sounds,—
   Stranger than wind or natural cause could utter.

Craw.
   And thou wast sure they were unnatural sounds?
   And hast thou heard them often?

Sexton.
                                            Many times:
   But that was in the first years of mine office.
   I am not now alarm'd: use makes me feel
   As if no harm could e'er befall the sexton:
   And e'en my wife will in dark winter nights
   Enter the church alone and toll the bell.

Craw.
   And ne'er has been alarm'd by any sight
   Of apparition or unearthly thing?

Sexton.
   Yes; she was once alarm'd.

Craw.

 eagerly .
                                            And what appear'd?

Sexton.
   It was, as nearly as I can remember,
   Upon a Friday night—

Craw.

 quickly .
                                            Ne'er mind the night: what was it that she saw?

Sexton.
   Nay, she herself saw nothing; but the dog
   That follow'd her bark'd briskly, then stopp'd short,
   And, with a kind of stifled choking howl,
   Look'd in her face, then cower'd by her side,
   Trembling for fear; and then right well she knew
   Some elrich thing was near her, though its form
   Was only visible to the poor brute.

Craw.
   You think the dog saw something.

Sexton.
                                            Certes did he!
   And had he not been dumb, he could, no doubt,
   Have told a tale to set our hair on end.

Claude

 who, during their discourse, has been pacing to and fro impatiently, to sexton .
   You know not who it was?

Sexton.
   The Lord preserve us, sir! for she saw nothing.

Claude.
   What dost thou mean? Couldst thou not guess, at least,
   Who 'twas who made request to chant the dirge?

Sexton.
   Ay, ay! the dirge. In truth I cannot say.
   It was a man I never saw before.

Claude

 eagerly .
   Stately, and of a stature somewhat taller
   Than middle size, of countenance somewhat younger
   Than middle age?

Sexton.
   No; short, and grave, and ancient, like a priest
   From foreign parts.


 Music sounds again.
Craw.
                                            Be still and hear the dirge.

DIRGE
sung by several voices without.

   Dear spirit! freed from earthy cell,
      From mortal thraldom freed;
   The blessed Virgin keep thee well,
      And thy dread passage speed!

   Quick be thy progress, gentle soul!
      Through purifying pain,
   To the saved Christian's happy goal,
      Thy Father's bright domain!

   Beloved on earth! by love redeem'd,
      Which earthly love transcends,
   Earth's show,—the dream that thou hast dream'd,
      In waking transport ends.

   Then, bathed in fountains of delight,
      Mayst thou God's mercy prove,
   His glory open'd to thy sight,
      And to thy heart His love!

   There may thy blessed dwelling be,
      For ever to endure
   With those who were on earth like thee,
      The guileless and the pure!

   Dear spirit! from thy earthy cell,
      From mortal thraldom freed, &c. &c.
Claude

 seeing the light disappear .
   They are all gone at last: unlock the gate.

 The sexton applies the key, but in vain.
   Canst thou not open it? what is the matter?

Sexton.
   I've brought a key made for another gate;
   Woe worth my stupid head!

Claude.
                                            I'll climb the wall.

Sexton.
   Be not so very hasty, please your honour.
   This key unlocks the southern gate: I pray you
   To follow me, and you will soon have entrance.
   Woe worth my stupid head!


 Exeunt.
SCENE V.
The churchyard, near the walls of St. Mungo's church, which occupies the bottom of the stage. A newly covered grave is dimly seen near the front; the stage darkened, but not entirely so; a degree of light, as from a new-risen moon in a cloudy night, showing objects imperfectly.

Enter Malcolm , who bends over the grave for some time in silence.
Mal.
   And here beneath this trampled sod she lies,
   Stiffen'd and cold, and swathed in coffin-weeds,
   Who, short while since, moved like a gleam of brightness,
   Lighting each face, and cheering every heart.
   Oh, Emma, Emma Graham, is this thy place?
   Dearer than thou a lover's soul ne'er worshipp'd;


 
   Fairer than thou a virgin's robe ne'er wrapt;
   Better than thou a parent's tongue ne'er bless'd.
   Oh, Emma Graham, the dearest, fairest, best!
   Pair'd with thee in the dance, this hand in thine,
   I've led thee through the whirl of mazy transport,
   And o'er thy chair have hung with wistful ear,
   Catching thy words like strains of melody,
   To be with fancy's treasures stored for ever.
   I've waited near thy portal many an hour,
   To see thy hasty transit from its steps
   To the grim gaping coach, that seem'd to swallow,
   Like a leviathan, its beauteous prey.
   And now alas! I come to seek thee here!
   I come to seek thee here, but not to find.
   This heart, which yearns through its ribb'd fence to break
   Into the darken'd cell where thou art laid
   In Nature's thraldom, is from thee divided
   As by a gulf impassable. Oh, oh!
   So short a time! such fearful, sad transition!
   My day is turn'd to night; my youth to age;
   May life to death be the next welcome change!

 Throws himself on the grave in a burst of sorrow.
   Sweet love, who sleepst beneath, canst thou not hear me?
   Oh, if thou couldst! Alas! alas! thou canst not!

 After a pause, and half-raising himself from the grave.
   But is it well, and is it holy, thus,
   On such a sacred spot, to mourn the dead,
   As lost and perish'd treasure? God forgive me!
   The silver lamp, with all its rich embossments
   Of beauteous workmanship, is struck and broken,
   But is the flame extinguish'd? God forgive me!
   Forgive a wretched and distracted man,
   And grant me better thoughts!—The unclothed spirit
   In blessed purity hath still existence.
   Perhaps, in its high state is not unconscious
   Of what remains behind; perhaps, beholds
   The very spot. Oh, if she does! her pity—
   Her pity, yea, her love now rests upon me.
   Her spirit, from the body newly freed,
   Was in my father's house, ere it departed
   To its celestial home; was it not sympathy?
   O! Emma, Emma! could I surely know
   That I was dear to thee, a word,—a token
   Had been to me a cherish'd, rich possession,
   Outvaluing all that martial chiefs contend for
   On their embattled fields.—Ha! who approaches?
Enter Claude.

   Come not, I warn thee, near this sacred spot.


 Springing up from the ground.
Claude.
   A sacred spot, indeed! but yet to all
   Who loved in life the dead whom it contains,
   Free as the house of God.

Mal.
                                            I say it is not.
   In this, her first night of the grave, the man
   Who loved her best when living, claims a right
   To watch the new-closed tomb, and none beside.

Claude.
   Then yield to me that right, for it is mine;
   For I have loved her longest,—long ere thou
   Hadst look'd upon her face, or heard her name.

Mal.
   'Tis not the date, but potency of love
   Which bears account: I say, approach no nearer.

Claude.
   Must I endure such passion? Frantic man!
   Are we not both in grief smitten to the earth?
   May we not both weep o'er this sacred spot,
   Partners in wretchedness?

Mal.
   Away, away! I own no partnership;
   He who hath spok'n such word hath thereby proved
   The poorness of his love. Approach no nearer.
   I'll yield my heart's blood rather than resign
   This my sad eminence in widow'd sorrow.

Claude.
   Dar'st thou to hinder me?

Mal.
                                            I dare and will.


 They grapple fiercely.

Enter Crawford.
Craw.

 separating them. 
   For shame! for shame! to hold contention here!
   Mutual affliction should make friends of foes,
   Not foes of friends. The grave of one beloved
   Should be respected e'en as holy ground,—
   Should have a charm to smother all resentment.

Mal.
   And so it should, and shall.—Forgive me, Claude;
   I have been froward in my wretchedness.

Claude.
   And I, dear Malcolm, was to blame, so suddenly
   To break upon thy sorrow.

Craw.
   The provost hath despatch'd a messenger
   Upon our track, who found me out e'en now,
   Requesting both of you to give your presence
   On an occasion solemn and important.

Claude.
   What may it be?

Craw.
   Within the late apartment of the dead,
   Your sister has a duty to perform,
   Enjoin'd her by the dead. And 'tis her wish
   That ye should both be present.

Claude and Mal.

 together .
   We will obey her shortly. Go before us.


 Exeunt Crawford and Malcolm ; and Claude , after bending in silence for a few moments over the grave, follows them.
SCENE VI.
An apartment, the walls of which are lined with oak, and partly hung with arras.

Enter a Maid Servant, carrying a lamp and a basket, &c.
Maid

 speaking as she enters .
   I trow, when we have burnt this second parcel,
   The sickly air must needs be purified.


 
   But what does all this fuming signify,
   Since we must die at our appointed time?
   What dost thou think—

 looking round and seeming alarmed 
   —She has not follow'd me.
   I thought she was behind me. Lord preserve us!
   Here in this ghastly chamber all alone!

 Going to the door and calling.
   Art thou not coming. Marjory? Where art thou?
   I say, where art thou? I have need of thee.


Enter a  d Maid.
 d maid.
   Why didst thou call so loud? What is the matter?

 st maid.
   I thought thou wast behind me: merey on us!
   A kind of qualm came o'er me, when I look'd
   On all within this silent dismal room,
   And to that corner where the death-bed stood,—
   A sudden qualm came o'er me.

 d maid.
   Let us be busy—there's no time to lose;
   The provost and his daughter will be here
   Ere we have done our work.


 They take gums and dried herbs from the basket, which they set fire to by the lamp, and fumigate the chamber, speaking the while occasionally.
 st maid.
   The Lord preserve us! 'tis an awful thing.

 d maid.
   It was a sudden call: so young,—so good!

 st maid.
   Ay, many a sore heart thinks of her this night.

 d maid.
   And he, the most of all, that noble gentleman:
   Lord pardon him for being what he is!

 st maid.
   And what is that?

 d maid.
                                            A rank and Roman papist.

 st maid.
   The Lord forgive him that, if it be so!—
   And quickly, too; for this same deadly fever,
   As I hear say, has seized upon him also.


Enter Provost.
Provost.
   That's well, good damsels; you have done your task
   Right thoroughly: a whelesome, fragrant smell
   Is floating all about. Where is your master?

 st maid.
   In his own chamber. When he knows your honour
   Is in the house, he will attend you presently.

 d maid.
   And it will do him good to see your honour.

Provost.
   I fear, my joe, the good that I can do him,
   Or e'en the minister, if he were here,
   Would be but little. Grief must have its time.
   Some opiate drug would be to him, I reckon,
   Worth all my company, and something more.
   Howbeit, I'll go to him. My good old friend!
   My heart bleeds for him.—Ye have done enough;
   The ladies are at hand.


 Exit by the opposite side.

Enter Alice and Marian.
Marian.
   Take hold of me; thy summon'd strength, I fear,
   Forsakes thee now.

 She supports Alice , and they walk slowly to the middle of the room.
   Ay, thou lookst round, as if in search of something?

Alice.
   They have removed it.

Marian.
                                            What have they removed?

Alice.
   The bed on which she lay. Oh, woe is me!
   The last time I was in this chamber, Marian,
   Becoming suddenly, from some slight cause,
   A passing sufferer, she laid my head
   On her own pillow, and her own soft hand
   Press'd me so gently; I was then the patient,
   And she the tender nurse. I little thought
   So short a time—Alas! my dear, dear friend!

Marian.
   Short time indeed for such a dismal change:
   I may not chide thy tears.

Alice.
   Here are the virginals on which she play'd;
   And here's her musie, too.

 Taking up a book from the virginals, and opening it.
                                            Ah, woe is me!
   The very tune which last she play'd to me
   Has open'd to my hand, and 'twixt the leaves
   The little flower lies press'd which then I gave her!

Marian.
   'Tis sweet to find it so.

Alice.
                                            But, oh! how sad!
   She was—she was—

 Bursting into tears.
                                            Well may I weep for her!

Marian.
   Be comforted, dear Alice! she is gone
   Where neither pain nor woe can touch her more.

Alice.
   I know—I know it well: but she is gone!
   She who was fair, and gifted, and beloved:
   And so beloved!—Had it been heaven's blest will
   To take me in her stead, tears had been shed,
   But what had been their woe, compared to this?

Marian.
   Whose woe, dear Alice?

Alice.
   His woe—their woe; poor Claude's, and Malcolm's too.
   Death seizes on the dearest and the best!

Marian

 embracing her .
   I will not hear thee say so, gentle Alice.
   A dearer and a better than thyself
   'Twere hard to find. No; nor do I believe
   That she whom thou lamentest did surpass thee.

Alice.
   Hush! say it not!—I pray thee, say not so:
   In pitying me thou must not rob the dead.
   That he preferr'd a creature of such excellence,
   Took from the wound its sting and bitterness.
   Thou mayst not wrong the dead!

Marian.
                                            I will not, then,



 
Alice

 looking round .
   There is the arras that conceals the place:
   Her awful words are sounding in my ears,
   Which bade me search. I feel a secret awe!
   But that her spirit from the earth has ta'en—
   As I am well assured—its final leave,
   I could believe that she is near me still,
   To see the very act!


 Looking round her fearfully.
Marian.
   Nay, check thy ardent fancy: 'tis not good
   To let such dismal notions haunt thee so—
   Thy father comes, with his afflicted friend.


Enter Provost, leading Graham by the hand.

 Alice advances affectionately to Graham , who opens his arms to receive her, and she weeps upon his neck, without speaking. She then leads him to a chair, and seats herself upon a stool at his feet, taking his hand in hers, and bending over it, while the Provost and Marian remain in the front.
Provost

 looking at them .
   That poor old man! he utters not a word
   Of sorrow or complaint; and all the more
   I grieve for him. God help him! in whose hands
   The hearts of men are kept.

Marian.
   And he is help'd, for he is weeping now.

Provost.
   He did not weep when we for him were weeping,
   And he will weep when all our tears are dried.
   —Our two young men, methinks, are long of coming.

Marian.
   But are you sure your messenger hath found them?

Provost.
   I scarcely doubt it. I have those in pay,
   But little better than the prey they follow,
   Who are expert in dogging stealthy rogues;
   And it were strange indeed if artless men
   Should foil their skill.—
   And I am right—I hear their coming steps!


Enter Malcolm and Claude.
Mal.

 after doing silent obeisance to the Provost and Graham , who, with Alice , come forward to meet them, speaks in a low voice to Claude .
   And here, night after night, in all her beauty,
   She took her curtain'd rest, and here she died!
   But that which I expected is not here:
   Is this the very chamber?

Alice

 overhearing him, and in a low voice .
   It is: but what thou lookst for is removed.

 Pointing. 
   Upon that spot it stood.

Mal.
   Yes, thou hast read my thought, most gentle Alice!


 Goes to the spot, where he remains in silence, covering his face with his hands.
Provost.
   Shall we not now proceed upon the business
   For which we are convened?

 To Graham. 
                                            To you, my ancient friend, I have explain'd it.
   Malcolm and Claude, know ye why in this chamber
   Your presence has been solemnly requested.

Claude.
   I guess it well. My sister has inform'd me
   Of Emma's last request; and I to Malcolm,
   As we came hither, have repeated it.

Provost

 to Alice .
   Now, dearest child! it is for thee to act.


 Leads Alice to the bottom of the stage, where, taking aside the arras which covers the wall, a small door is discovered.
Claude

 to Malcolm , seeing him take a book from a book-case .
   Why dost thou snatch that book so eagerly?

Malcolm.
   It is the book I praised to her so much
   A short while since; and see, she has procured it!

Claude.
   Ah! thou mayst well be proud. But how is this?
   Thy countenance all o' the sudden changed!

 Malcolm lets the book drop from his hand, and Claude takes it up eagerly, and opens it, reading.
   “The gift of one most dear.”—Of one most dear!
   Thou didst not give it to her?

Mal.
                                            No; nor thou!

Marian.
   Hush, hush! words of ungentle rivalry
   Do ill become this solemn place. Be calm.
   See! Alice in the cabinet hath found
   That which the vision'd form so earnestly
   Directed her to search for.


 Alice , returning to the front with a small box in her hands, places it on a table, the rest gathering eagerly round her, and endeavours to open it.
Alice.
   I know this box: alas! I know it well,
   And many a time have open'd it; but now—

Provost.
   Thy hands have lost all power, thou tremblest so.

 Taking it from her and from Graham , who attempts to assist her.
   Nay, friend, thou tremblest also: I will do it.


 Opens the box, and takes out a written paper.
Omnes.
   What is it?

Provost.
                                            Give me time to look upon it.

Gra.
   Some deed or testament. Alas, poor child!
   Had she prepared for such an early death?

Provost.
   It is no testament.

Mal.

 impatiently .
                                            What is it then?

Claude.
   Nay, father, do not keep us in suspense!

Provost.
   It is a formal contract of betrothment;
   Vows sworn between herself and Basil Gordon.

Gra.
   That popish cadet of a hostile house
   To me and mine!—Let mine own eyes examine it.


 
   Contracted secretly! to him contracted!
   But she is in her grave, and I—O God!
   Grant me with patience to endure Thy chastening!
   Contracted! married!

Provost.
   Not married; no,—a mutual solemn promise,
   Made to each other in the sight of heav'n.
   Thus run the words:—

 Reads. 
                                            “I, Basil Gordon, will no woman wed
   But Emma Graham.”—Then follows her engagement:—
   “I, Emma Graham, will wed no other man
   Than Basil Gordon: yet will never marry
   But with consent of my much honour'd father,
   When he, less prejudiced, shall know and own
   The worth of him I love.”

 Spreading out the paper.
   This is her writing, as you plainly see;
   And this is Gordon's, for I know it well.

Gra.

 beating his breast .
   This blow! this blow! a Gordon and a papist!

Provost.
   True, he is both: the last, I must confess,
   No trivial fault. Howbeit he is, in truth,
   A brave and noble gentleman.

Alice.
   Indeed he is, dear sir. Your gentle Emma
   Could love no other. Valiant in the field,
   As frequent foreign records have attested:
   In private conduct good and honourable;
   And loving her he loved, as he has done,
   With ardent, tender constancy—

Mal.
                                            Hold! hold!
   He loved her not—by heav'n he loved her not!
   When all who ever knew her, drown'd in sorrow,
   Follow'd her hearse, he—he alone was absent.
   Where was he then, I pray?

Provost.
                                            I'll tell thee where:
   Stretch'd on a sick-bed—smitten by the same
   Most pestilent disease that slew his mistress.

Mal.
   Ha! is it so!

 Turning to Claude. 
   Then we must hold our peace.

Claude.
   And with each other be at peace, dear Malcolm:
   What is there now of rivalry between us?

Mal.
   Speak not so gently to me, noble Claude!
   I've been to thee so wayward and unjust,
   Thy kindness wrings the heart which it should soften.

 After a pause. 
   And all our fond delusion ends in this!
   We've tack'd our shallow barks for the same course!
   And the fair mimie isle, like Paradise,
   Which seem'd to beckon us, was but a bank
   Of ocean's fog, now into air dissolved!

Alice.
   No; say not beckon'd. She was honourable
   As she was fair: no wily woman's art
   Did e'er disgrace her worth:—believe me, Malcolm.

Mal.
   Yes; I believe thee, and I bless thee too,
   Thou best and loveliest friend of one so lovely!
   Pardon me, dearest Alice! generous Alice!
   Pardon the hasty error of a word
   Which had no meaning—no intended meaning
   To cast one shade of blame on thy dear friend;
   For henceforth by no other appellation
   But thy dear friend shall she be named by me.

 Turning to Graham.
   And you, dear sir! look not so sternly sad.
   Her love outran her duty one short step,
   But would no farther go, though happiness
   Was thereby peril'd. Though his house and yours,
   His creed and yours, were so at variance, still,
   She might expect his noble qualities
   Would in the end subdue a father's heart,
   Who did so fondly love her.

Gra.
   Cease! I am weak, bereft, and desolate,—
   A poor old man, my pride of wisdom sear'd
   And ground to dust: what power have I to judge?
   May God forgive me if I did amiss!

Claude

 to Provost .
   Did Gordon see her ere she breathed her last?

Provost.
   He did. The nurse, who was her close attendant,
   Says, that he came by stealth into her chamber,
   And with her words and looks of tenderness
   Exchanged, though near her last extremity.
   And there he caught the fatal malady.

Claude.
   A happy end for him, if it should prove so.


Enter a Servant, who draws the Provost aside.
Provost

 aside to servant .
   Thou hast a woeful face! what has befallen?


 Servant speaks to him in a whisper.
Marian

 to Alice .
   Thy father has received some woeful tidings.

Alice.
   I fear he has; he stands in thoughtful silence.
   Father, how is't? your thoughts are very sad.

Provost.
   Ay; were this span of earthly being all,
   'Twere sad to think how wealth and domination,
   Man's valour, landed pride, and woman's beauty,
   When over them the blighting wind hath pass'd,
   Are turned to vanity, and known no more!


 The bell of a neighbouring church tolls five times.
Mal.
   What bell is that?

Claude.
   Some spirit is released from mortal thraldom.

Alice.
   And passing on its way, we humbly hope,
   To endless happiness.

Provost.
   I trust it is, though stern divines may doubt:
   'Tis Basil Gordon's knell!


 The bell tolls again at measured intervals, and, after a solemn pause, the curtain drops.


THE MARTYR: A DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.

 

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA MEN Nero , emperor of Rome.

Cordenius Maro , officer of the imperial guard.

Orceres , a Parthian prince, visiting Rome.

Sulpicius , a senator.

Sylvius , a brave centurion.

Roman Pontiff.

Christian father or bishop, Christian brother, &c.

A page, in the family of Sulpicius.

Senators, Christians, soldiers, &c.

WOMEN Portia , daughter of Sulpicius.

Christian women.



Scene , Rome.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A private apartment in the house of Sulpicius.

Enter Sulpicius and Orceres by opposite sides.
Sul.
   So soon return'd!—I read not in thy face
   Aught to encourage or depress my wishes.
   How is it, noble friend?

Or.
   E'en as it was ere I received my mission.
   Cordenius Maro is on public duty;
   I have not seen him.—When he knows your offer,
   His heart will bound with joy, like eaglet plumed,
   Whose outstretch'd pinions, wheeling round and round,
   Shape their first circles in the sunny air.

Sul.
   And with good cause.

Or.
                                            Methinks I see him now!
   A face with blushes mantling to the brow,
   Eyes with bright tears surcharged, and parted lips
   Quiv'ring to utter joy which hath no words.

Sul.
   His face, indeed, as I have heard thee say,
   Is like a wave which sun and shadow cross;
   Each thought makes there its momentary mark.

Or.
   And then his towering form, and vaulting step,
   As tenderness gives way to exultation!
   O! it had been a feast to look upon him;
   And still shall be.

Sul.
                                            Art thou so well convinced
   He loves my little damsel?—She is fair,
   But seems to me too simple, gay, and thoughtless,
   For noble Maro. Heiress as she is
   To all my wealth, had I suspected sooner,
   That he had smother'd wishes in his breast
   As too presumptuous, or that she in secret
   Preferr'd his silent homage to the praise
   Of any other man, I had most frankly
   Removed all hindrance to so fair a suit.
   For, in these changeling and degenerate days,
   I scarcely know a man of nobler worth.

Or.
   Thou scarcely knowst! Say certainly thou dost not.
   He is, to honest right, as simply true
   As shepherd child on desert pasture bred,
   Where falsehood and deceit have never been;
   And to maintain them, ardent, skilful, potent,
   As the shrewd leader of unruly tribes.
   A simple heart and subtle spirit join'd
   Make such an union, as in Nero's court
   May pass for curious and unnatural.

Sul.
   But is the public duty very urgent
   That so untowardly delays our happiness?

Or.
   The punishment of those poor Nazarenes,


 
   Who, in defiance of imperial power,
   To their forbidden faith and rights adhere
   With obstinacy most astonishing.

Sul.
   A stubborn contumacy, unaccountable!

Or.
   There's sorcery in it, or some stronger power.
   But be it what it may, or good, or ill,
   They look on death in its most dreadful form,
   As martial heroes on a wreath of triumph.
   The fires are kindled in the place of death,
   And bells toll dismally. The life of Rome
   In one vast clust'ring mass hangs round the spot,
   And no one to his neighbour utters word,
   But in an alter'd voice, with breath restrain'd,
   Like those who speak at midnight near the dead.
   Cordenius heads the band that guards the pile;
   So station'd, who could speak to him of pleasure?
   My words had come like sounds of evil omen.

Sul.
   Cease; here comes Portia, with a careless face:
   She knows not yet the happiness that waits her.

Or.
   Who brings she with her thus, as if compell'd
   By playful force?

Sul.
   'Tis her Numidian page; a cunning imp,
   Who must be woo'd to do the thing he's proud of.


Enter Portia , dragging Syphax after her, speaking as she enters.
Portia.
   Come in, deceitful thing!—I know thee well;
   With all thy sly affected bashfulness,
   Thou'rt bold enough to sing in Cæsar's court,
   With the whole senate present.

 To Orceres. 
                                            Prince of Parthia,
   I knew not you were here; but yet I guess
   The song which this sly creature sings so well,
   Will please you also.

Or.
   How can it fail, fair Portia, so commended?

Sul.
   What is this boasted lay?

Portia.
                                            That tune, my father,
   Which you so oft have tried to recollect;
   But link'd with other words, of new device,
   That please my fancy well.—Come, sing it, boy!

Sul.
   Nay, sing it, Syphax, be not so abash'd,
   If thou art really so.—Begin, begin!
   But speak thy words distinctly as thou singst,
   That I may have their meaning perfectly.

SONG.    The storm is gath'ring far and wide,
   Yon mortal hero must abide.
   Power on earth, and power in air,
   Falchion's gleam and lightning's glare:
   Arrows hurtling through the blast;
   Stones from flaming meteor cast;
   Floods from burthen'd skies are pouring,
   Mingled strife of battle roaring;
   Nature's rage and Demon's ire,
   Belt him round with turmoil dire:
   Noble hero, earthly wight,
   Brace thee bravely for the fight!

   And so, indeed, thou tak'st thy stand,
   Shield on arm and glaive in hand;
   Breast encased in burnish'd steel,
   Helm on head, and pike on heel;
   And, more than meets the outward eye,
   The soul's high-temper'd panoply,
   Which every limb for action lightens,
   The form dilates, the visage brightens:
   Thus art thou, lofty, mortal wight,
   Full nobly harness'd for the fight!

Or.
   The picture of some very noble hero
   These lines pourtray.

Sul.
   So it should seem; one of the days of old.

Portia.
   And why of olden days? There liveth now
   The very man—a man—I mean to say,
   There may be found among our Roman youth,
   One, who in form and feelings may compare
   With him, whose lofty virtues these few lines
   So well describe.

Or.
                                            Thou meanst the lofty Gorbus.

Portia.
   Out on the noisy braggart. Arms without
   He hath, indeed, well burnish'd and well plumed,
   But the poor soul, within, is pluck'd and bare,
   Like any homely thing.

Or.
   Sertorius Galba then?

Portia.
                                            O, stranger still!
   For if he hath no lack of courage, certes,
   He hath much lack of grace. Sertorius Galba!

Or.
   Perhaps thou meanst Cordenius Maro, lady.
   Thy cheeks grow scarlet at the very name,
   Indignant that I still should err so strangely.

Portia.
   No, not indignant, for thou errest not;
   Nor do I blush, albeit thou thinkst I do,
   To say, there is not of our Romans one,
   Whose martial form a truer image gives
   Of firm heroic courage.

Sul.
                                            Cease, sweet Portia!
   He only laughs at thy simplicity.

Or.
   Simplicity seen through a harmless wile,
   Like to the infant urchin, half conceal'd
   Behind his smiling dam's transparent veil.
   The song is not a stranger to mine ear,
   Methinks I've heard it passing through those wilds,
   Whose groves and caves, if rumour speak the truth,
   Are by the Nazarenes or Christians haunted.

Sul.
   Let it no more be sung within my walls:
   A chaunt of their's to bring on pestilence!
   Sing it no more. What sounds are those I hear?

Or.
   The dismal death-drum and the crowd without.
   They are this instant leading past your door
   Those wretched Christians to their dreadful doom.

Sul.
   We'll go and see them pass.


 Exeunt hastily , Sulpicius, Orceres.


 
Portia

 stopping her ears .
   I cannot look on them, nor hear the sound.
   I'll to my chamber.

Page.
                                            May not I, I pray,
   Look on them as they pass?

Portia.
                                            No; go not, child:
   'Twill frighten thee; it is a horrid sight.

Page.
   Yet, an it please you, lady, let me go.

Portia.
   I say it is a horrid, piteous sight,
   Thou wilt be frighten'd at it.

Page.
   Nay, be it e'er so piteous or so horrid,
   I have a longing, strong desire to see it.

Portia.
   Go then; in this there is no affectation:
   There's all the harden'd cruelty of man
   Lodged in that tiny form, child as thou art.


 Exeunt severally.
SCENE II.
An open square, with buildings.

Enter Cordenius Maro , at the head of his soldiers, who draw up on either side; then enters a long procession of public functionaries, &c., conducting martyrs to the place of execution, who, as they pass on, sing together in unison: one, more noble than the others, walking first.
SONG.
   A long farewell to sin and sorrow,
      To beam of day and evening shade;
   High in glory breaks our morrow,
      With light that cannot fade.

   We leave the hated and the hating,
      Existence sad in toil and strife;
   The great, the good, the brave are waiting
      To hail our opening life.

   Earth's faded sounds our ears forsaking,
      A moment's silence death shall be;
   Then to heaven's jubilee awaking,
      Faith ends in victory.

 Exeunt martyrs, &c. &c. Cordenius with his officers and soldiers still remaining; the officers on the front, and Cordenius apart from them in a thoughtful posture.
 st offi.
   Brave Varus marches boldly at the head
   Of that deluded band.

 d offi.
   Are these the men who hateful orgies hold,
   In dens and deserts with enchantments wooing
   The intercourse of demons?

 d offi.
                                            Ay, with rites
   Cruel and wild. To crucify a babe,
   And, while it yet hangs shrieking on the rood,
   Fall down and worship it! device abominable!

 st offi.
   Dost thou believe it?

 d offi.
   I can believe or this or any thing
   Of the possess'd and mad.

 st offi.
   What demonry, thinkst thou, possesses Varus?

 d offi.
   That is well urged.
 To the other. 
Is he a maniac?
   Alas, that I should see so brave a soldier
   Thus, as a malefactor, led to death!

 st offi.
   Viewing his keen enliven'd countenance
   And stately step, one should have rather guess'd
   He led victorious soldiers to the charge:
   And they, indeed, appear'd to follow him
   With noble confidence.

 d offi.
                                            'Tis all vain seeming.
   He is a man, who makes a show of valour
   To which his deeds have borne slight testimony.

Cor.

 advancing indignantly .
   Thou liest; a better and a braver soldier
   Ne'er fronted foe, nor closed in bloody strife.


 Turning away angrily to the background.
 st offi.
   Our chief, methinks, is in a fretful mood,
   Which is not usual with him.

 d offi.
   He did not seem to listen to our words,
   Yet they have moved him keenly.—
   But see, he gives the signal to proceed;
   We must advance, and with our closing ranks
   The fatal pile encircle.


 Exeunt in order, whilst a chorus of martyrs is heard at a distance.
SCENE III.
An apartment in a private house.

Enter two Christian Women by opposite sides.
 st woman.
   Hast thou heard any thing?

 d woman.
   Nought, save the murmur of the multitude,
   Sinking at times to deep and awful silence,
   From which again a sudden burst will rise
   Like mingled exclamations, as of horror
   Or admiration. In these neighbouring streets
   I have not met a single citizen,
   The town appearing uninhabited.
   But wherefore art thou here? Thou shouldst have stay'd
   With the unhappy mother of poor Cælus.

 st woman.
   She sent me hither in her agony
   Of fear and fearful hope.

 d woman.
   Ha! does she hope deliverance from death?

 st woman.
   O no! thou wrongst her, friend; it is not that:
   Deliverance is her fear, and death her hope.
   A second time she bears a mother's throes
   For her young stripling, whose exalted birth
   To endless life is at this fearful crisis,
   Or earn'd or lost. May heaven forefend the last!
   He is a timid youth, and soft of nature:
   God grant him strength to bear that fearful proof!

 d woman.
   Here comes our reverend father.


 

Enter a Christian Father.
   What tidings dost thou bring? are they in bliss?

Father.
   Yes, daughter, as I trust, they are ere this
   In high immortal bliss. Cælus alone—

 st woman.
   He hath apostatised! O woe is me!
   O woe is me for his most wretched mother!

Father
   Apostatised! No; stripling as he is,
   His fortitude, where all were braced and brave,
   Shone paramount.
   For his soft downy cheek and slender form
   Made them conceive they might subdue his firmness:
   Therefore he was reserved till noble Varus
   And his compeers had in the flames expired
   Then did they court and tempt him with fair promise
   Of all that earthly pleasure or ambition
   Can offer, to deny his holy faith.
   But he, who seem'd before so meek and timid,
   Now suddenly imbued with holy grace,
   Like the transition of some watery cloud
   In passing o'er the moon's refulgent disc,
   Glow'd with new life; and from his fervid tongue
   Words of most firm indignant constancy
   Pour'd eloquently forth; then to the pile
   Sprang he as lightly as a dauntless warrior
   Scaling the breach of honour; or, alas!
   As I have seen him 'midst his boyish mates,
   Vaulting aloft for very love of motion.

 st woman.
   High heaven be praised for this!—
   thine eyes beheld it?

Father.
   I saw it not: the friend who witness'd it,
   Left him yet living 'midst devouring flame;
   Therefore I spoke of Cælus doubtfully,
   If he as yet belong'd to earth or heaven.


 They cover their faces, and remain silent.

Enter a Christian Brother.
Brother.
   Lift up your heads, my sisters! let your voices
   In grateful thanks be raised! Those ye lament,
   Have earthly pangs for heavenly joy exchanged.
   The manly Varus, and the youthful Cælus,
   The lion and the dove, yoke-fellows link'd,
   Have equal bliss and equal honour gain'd.

st woman.
   And praised be God, who makes the weakest strong!
   I'll to his mother with the blessed tidings.


 Exit.
Father.
   Let us retire and pray. How soon our lives
   May have like ending, God alone doth know!
   O! may like grace support us in our need!


 Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
An open space in front of a temple.

Enter Cordelius , as returned from the execution with his soldiers, who, upon a signal from him, disperse and leave him alone. He walks a few paces slowly, then stops, and continues for a short time in a thoughtful posture.
Cor.
   There is some power in this, or good or ill,
   Surpassing nature. When the soul is roused
   To desp'rate sacrifice, 'tis ardent passion,
   Or high exalted virtue that excites it.
   Can loathsome demonry in dauntless bearing
   Outdo the motives of the lofty brave?
   It cannot be! There is some power in this
   Mocking all thought—incomprehensible.

 Remains for a moment silent and thoughtful, while Sylvius enters behind him unperceived.
   Delusion! ay, 'tis said the cheated sight
   Will see unreal things; the cheated ear
   List to sweet sounds that are not; even the reason
   Maintain conclusions wild and inconsistent.
   We hear of this:—the weak may be deluded;
   But is the learn'd, th' enlighten'd noble Varus
   The victim of delusion?—Can it be?
   I'll not believe it.

Sylvius

 advancing to him .
                                            No, believe it not.

Cor.

 starting .
   Ha! one so near me!
   I have seen thy face before; but where? who art thou?

Sylvius.
   E'en that Centurion of the Seventh Legion,
   Who, with Cordenius Maro, at the siege
   Of Fort Volundum ,  mounted first the breach;
   And kept the clust'ring enemy in check,
   Till our encouraged Romans followed us.

Cor.
   My old companion then, the valiant Sylvius,
   Thou'st done hard service since I saw thee last:
   Thy countenance is mark'd with graver lines
   Than in those greener days: I knew thee not.
   Where goest thou now? I'll bear thee company.

Sylvius.
   I thank thee: yet thou mayst not go with me.
   The way that I am wending suits not thee,
   Though suiting well the noble and the brave.
   It were not well, in fiery times like these,
   To tempt thy generous mind.

Cor.
                                            What dost thou mean?

Sylvius

 after looking cautiously round to see that nobody is near .
   Did I not hear thee commune with thyself
   Of that most blessed Martyr gone to rest,
   Varus Dobella?

Cor.
   How blessed? My unsettled thoughts were busy
   With things mysterious; with those magic powers


 
   That work the mind to darkness and destruction;
   With the sad end of the deluded Varus.

Sylvius.
   Not so, not so! The wisest prince on earth,
   With treasured wealth and armies at command,
   Ne'er earn'd withal such lofty exaltation
   As Varus now enjoys.

Cor.
   Thy words amaze me, friend; what is their meaning?

Sylvius.
   They cannot be explain'd with hasty speech
   In such a place. If thou wouldst really know—
   And may such light—

Cor.
                                            Why dost thou check thy words,
   And look so much disturb'd, like one in doubt?

Sylvius.
   What am I doing? Zeal, perhaps, betrays me.
   Yet, wherefore hide salvation from a man
   Who is so worthy of it?

Cor.
   Why art thou agitated thus? What moves thee?

Sylvius.
   And wouldst thou really know it?

Cor.
                                            Dost thou doubt me?
   I have an earnest, most intense desire.

Sylvius.
   Sent to thy heart, brave Roman, by a Power
   Which I may not resist.

 Bowing his head.
   But go not with me now in open day.
   At fall of eve I'll meet thee in the suburb,
   Close to the pleasure-garden of Sulpicius;
   Where in a bushy crevice of the rock
   There is an entry to the catacombs,
   Known but to few.

Cor.
                                            Ha! to the catacombs!

Syl.
   A dismal place, I own, but heed not that;
   For there thou'lt learn what, to thy ardent mind,
   Will make this world but as a thorny pass
   To regions of delight; man's natural life,
   With all its varied turmoil of ambition,
   But as the training of a wayward child
   To manly excellence; yea, death itself
   But as a painful birth to life uncnding.
   The word eternal has not to thine ears,
   As yet, its awful, ample sense convey'd.

Cor.
   Something possesses thee.

Sylvius.
                                            Yes, noble Maro;
   But it is something which can ne'er possess
   A mind that is not virtuous.—Let us part;
   It is expedient now.—All good be with thee!

Cor.
   And good be with thee, also, valiant soldier!

Sylvius

 returning as he is about to go out .
   At close of day, and near the pleasure-garden,—
   The garden of Sulpicius.

Cor.
   I know the spot, and will not fail to meet thee.


 Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
The Catacombs, showing long low-roofed aisles, in different directions, supported by thick pillars of the rough unhewn rock, with rude tombs and heaps of human bones, and the walls in many places lined with human skulls.

Enter Cordenius Maro , speaking to a Christian Father, on whose arm he leans, and followed by Sylvius.
Cor.
   One day and two bless'd nights, spent in acquiring
   Your heavenly lore, so powerful and sublime.—
   Oh! what an alter'd creature they have made me!

Father.
   Yes, gentle son, I trust that thou art alter'd.

Cor.
   I am, methinks, like one who, with bent back
   And downward gaze—if such an one might be—
   Hath only known the boundless azure sky
   By the strait circle of reflected beauty,
   Seen in the watery gleam of some deep pit:
   Till on a sudden roused, he stands erect,
   And wondering looks aloft and all around
   On the bright sunny firmament:—like one

Granting again that such an one might be
   Who hath but seen the element of fire
   On household hearth or woodman's smoky pile,
   And looks at once, 'mid 'stounding thunder-peals,
   On Jove's magnificence of lightning.—Pardon,
   I pray you pardon me! I mean His lightning,
   Who is the Jove of Jove, the great Jehovah.

Father

 smiling .
   Be not disturb'd, my son; the lips will utter,
   From lengthen'd habit, what the mind rejects.

Cor.
   These blessed hours, which I have pass'd with you,
   Have to my intellectual being given
   New feelings and expansion, like to that
   Which once I felt, on viewing by degrees
   The wide developement of nature's amplitude.

Father.
   And how was that, my son?

Cor.
   I well remember it; even at this moment
   Imagination sees it all again.
   'Twas on a lofty mountain of Armenia,
   O'er which I led by night my martial cohort,
   To shun the fierce heat of a summer's day.
   Close round us hung, the vapours of the night
   Had form'd a woofy curtain, dim and pale,
   Through which the waning moon did faintly mark
   Its slender crescent.

Father.
   Ay, the waned moon through midnight vapours seen,
   Fit emblem is of that retrenching light,
   Dubious and dim, which to the earliest patriarchs
   Was at the first vouchsafed; a moral guide,


 
   Soon clouded and obscured to their descendants,
   Who peopled far and wide, in scatter'd tribes,
   The fertile earth.—But this is interruption.
   Proceed, my son.

Cor.
                                            Well, on the lofty summit
   We halted, and the day's returning light
   On this exalted station found us. Then
   Our brighten'd curtain, wearing into shreds
   And rifted masses, through its opening gave
   Glimpse after glimpse of slow revealed beauty,
   Which held th' arrested senses magic-bound,
   In the intensity of charm'd attention.

Father.
   From such an eminence the op'ning mist
   Would to the eye reveal most beauteous visions.

Cor.
   First, far beneath us, woody peaks appear'd
   And knolls with cedars crested; then, beyond,
   And lower still, the herdsmen's cluster'd dwellings,
   With pasture slopes, and flocks just visible;
   Then, further still, soft wavy wastes of forest,
   In all the varied tints of sylvan verdure,
   Descending to the plain; then, wide and boundless,
   The plain itself, with towns and cultured tracts,
   And its fair river gleaming in the light,
   With all its sweepy windings, seen and lost,
   And seen again, till through the pale grey tint
   Of distant space, it seem'd a loosen'd cestus
   From virgin's tunic blown; and still beyond,
   The earth's extended vastness from the sight
   Wore like the boundless ocean.
   My heart beat rapidly at the fair sight—
   This ample earth, man's natural habitation.
   But now, when to my mental eye reveal'd,
   His moral destiny, so grand and noble,
   Lies stretching on even to immensity,
   It overwhelms me with a flood of thoughts,
   Of happy thoughts.

Father.
   Thanks be to God that thou dost feel it so!

Cor.
   I am most thankful for the words of power
   Which from thy gifted lips and sacred scripture
   I have received. What feelings they have raised!
   O what a range of thought given to the mind!
   And to the soul what loftiness of hope!
   That future dreamy state of faint existence
   Which poets have described and sages taught,
   In which the brave and virtuous pined and droop'd
   In useless indolence, changed for a state
   Of social love, and joy, and active bliss,—
   A state of brotherhood,—a state of virtue,
   So grand, so purified;—O it is excellent!
   My soul is roused within me at the sound,
   Like some poor slave, who from a dungeon issues
   To range with free-born men his native land.

Father.
   Thou mayst, indeed, my son, redeem'd from thraldom,
   Become the high compeer of blessed spirits.

Cor.
   The high compeer of such!—These gushing tears,
   Nature's mysterious tears, will have their way.

Father.
   To give thy heart relief.

Cor.
   And yet mysterious. Why do we weep
   At contemplation of exalted virtue?
   Perhaps in token of the fallen state
   In which we are, as thrilling sympathy
   Strangely acknowledges some sight and sound,
   Connected with a dear and distant home,
   Albeit the memory that link hath lost:—
   A kind of latent sense of what we were,
   Or might have been; a deep mysterious token.

Father.
   Perhaps thou'rt right, my son; for e'en the wicked
   Will sometimes weep at lofty, generous deeds.
   Some broken traces of our noble nature
   Were yet preserved; therefore our great Creator
   Still loved His work, and thought it worth redemption:
   Therefore His generous Son, our blessed Master,
   Did, as the elder brother of that race,
   Whose form He took, lay down His life to save us,
   But I have read thee, from our sacred book,
   His gentle words of love.

Cor.
   Thou hast! thou hast! they're stirring in my heart:
   Each fibre of my body thrills in answer
   To the high call.—

Father.
   The Spirit of Power, my son, is dealing with thee.

Cor.

 after a pause .
   One thing amazes me,— yet it is excellent.

Father.
   And what amazes thee? Unbosom freely
   What passes in thy mind.

Cor.
   That this religion which dilates our thoughts
   Of God Supreme to an infinity
   Of awful greatness, yet connects us with him,
   As children, loved and cherish'd;—
   Adoring awe with tenderness united.

Sylvius

 eagerly .
   Ay, brave Cordenius, that same thought more moved
   My rude unletter'd mind than all the rest.
   I struck my hand against my soldier's mail,
   And cried, “This faith is worthy of a man!”

Cor.
   Our best philosophers have raised their thoughts
   To one great universal Lord of all,
   Lord even of Jove himself and all the gods;
   Yet who durst feel for that high, distant Essence,
   A warmer sentiment than deep submission?
   But now, adoring love and grateful confidence
   Cling to th' infinity of power and goodness,
   As the repentant child turns to his sire
   With yearning looks, that say, “Am I not thine?”
   I am too bold: I should be humbled first
   In penitence and sorrow, for the stains
   Of many a hateful vice and secret passion.

Father.
   Check not the generous tenor of thy thoughts:
   O check it not! Love leads to penitence,
   And is the noblest, surest path; while fear


 
   Is dark and devious. To thy home return,
   And let thy mind well weigh what thou hast heard.
   If then thou feel within thee faith assured;
   That faith, which may, e'en through devouring flames,
   Its passage hold to heaven, baptismal rites
   Shall give thee entrance to a purer life,
   Receive thee, as thy Saviour's valiant soldier,
   For His high warfare arm'd.

Cor.
   I am resolved, and feel that in my heart
   There lives that faith; baptize me ere we part.

Father.
   So be it then. But yet that holy rite
   Must be deferr'd; for, lo! our brethren come,
   Bearing the ashes of our honour'd saints,
   Which must, with hymns of honour, be received.


Enter Christians, seen advancing slowly along one of the aisles, and bearing a large veiled urn, which they set down near the front. They then lift off the veil and range themselves round it, while one sings and the rest join in the chorus at the end of each short verse.
SONG.
   Departed brothers, generous brave,
      Who for the faith have died,
      Nor its pure source denied,
   Your bodies from devouring flames to save,

CHORUS.    Honour on earth, and bliss in heaven,
   Be to your saintly valour given!


   And we, who, left behind, pursue
      A pilgrim's weary way
      To realms of glorious day,
   Shall rouse our fainting souls with thoughts of you.
         Honour on earth, &c.


   Your ashes, mingled with the dust,
      Shall yet be forms more fair
      Than e'er breathed vital air,
   When earth again gives up her precious trust.
         Honour on earth, &c.


   The trump of angels shall proclaim,
      With tones far sent and sweet,
      Which countless hosts repeat,
   The generous martyr's never-fading name.
         Honour on earth, and bliss in heaven,
         Be to your saintly valour given!

Cor.

 to father .
   And ye believe those, who a few hours since
   Were clothed in flesh and blood, and here, before us,
   Lie thus, e'en to a few dry ashes changed,
   Are now exalted spirits, holding life
   With blessed powers, and agencies, and all
   Who have on earth a virtuous part fulfill'd?
   The dear redeem'd of Godlike love, again
   To their primeval destiny restored?
   It is a generous, powerful, noble faith.

Sylvius.
   Did I not tell thee, as we pass'd along,
   It well became a Roman and a soldier?

Father.
   Nay, worthy Sylvius, somewhat more of meekness
   And less of martial ardour were becoming
   In those, whose humble Lord stretch'd forth His hand,
   His saving hand, to e'en the meanest slave
   Who bends beneath an earthly master's rod.
   This faith is meet for all of human kind.

Cor.
   Forgive him, father: see, he stands reproved;
   His heart is meek, though ardent;
   It is, indeed, a faith for all mankind.

Father.
   We feel it such, my son, press'd as we are;
   On every side beset with threatening terrors.
   Look on these ghastly walls, these shapeless pillars,
   These heaps of human bones,—this court of death;
   E'en here, as in a temple, we adore
   The Lord of Life, and sing our song of hope,
   That death has lost its sting, the grave its triumph.

Cor.
   O make me then the partner of your hopes!

 Taking the hand of Sylvius , and then of several other Christians.
   Brave men! high destined souls! immortal beings!
   The blessed faith and sense of what we are
   Comes on my heart, like streams of beamy light
   Pour'd from some opening cloud. O to conceive
   What lies beyond the dim, dividing veil
   Of regions bright, of blest and glorious being!

Father.
   Ay, when it is withdrawn, we shall behold
   What heart hath ne'er conceived, nor tongue could utter.

Cor.
   When but a boy, I've gazed upon the sky,
   With all its sparks of light, as a grand cope
   For the benighted world. But now my fancy
   Will greet each twinkling star, as the bright lamp
   Of some fair angel on his guardian watch.
   And think ye not, that from their lofty stations
   Our future glorious home, our Father's house,
   May lie within the vast and boundless ken
   Of such seraphic powers?

Father.
   Thy fancy soars on wide and buoyant wings;
   Speak on, my son, I would not check thy ardour.

Cor.
   This solid earth is press'd bencath our feet,
   But as a step from which to take our flight;
   What boots it then, if rough or smooth it be,
   Serving its end?—Come, noble Sylvius!
   We've been companions in the broil of battle,
   Now be we fellow-soldiers in that warfare
   Which best becomes the brave.

Sylvius.
   Cordenius Maro, we shall be companions
   When this wide earth with all its fields of blood
   Where war hath raged, and all its towers of strength


 
   Which have begirded been with iron hosts,
   Are shrunk to nothing, and the flaming sun
   Is in his course extinguish'd.

Cor.
   Come, lead me, father, to the holy fount,
   If I in humble penitence may be
   From worldly vileness clear'd.

Father.
   I gladly will, my son. The Spirit of Grace
   Is dealing with thy spirit: be received,
   A ransom'd penitent, to the high fellowship
   Of all the good and bless'd in earth and heaven!
Enter a Convert.

   Whence com'st thou, Fearon? Why wast thou prevented
   From joining in our last respectful homage
   To those, who have so nobly for the truth
   Laid down their lives?

Convert.
   I have been watching near the grated dungeon
   Where Ethocles, the Grecian, is immured.

Father.
   Thou sayst not so! A heavier loss than this,
   If they have seized on him, the righteous cause
   Could not have suffer'd. Art thou sure of it?
   We had not heard of his return from Syria.

Convert.
   It is too true: he landed ten days since
   On the Brundusian coast, and, as he enter'd
   The gates of Rome, was seized and dragg'd to prison.

Father.
   And we in utter ignorance of this!

Convert.
   He travell'd late and unaccompanied,
   So this was done at nightfall and conceal'd.
   But see his writing given me by a guard,
   Who has for pity's sake betray'd his trust:
   It is address'd to thee.


 Giving him a paper.
Father

 after reading it .
   Alas, alas! it is a brief account
   Of his successful labours in the East:
   For with his excellent gifts of eloquence,
   Learning, and prudence, he has made more converts
   Than all our zealous brotherhood beside.
   What can we do? He will be sacrificed:
   The church in him must bleed, if God so wills.
   It is a dreadful blow.

Cor.

 to the convert .
   I pray thee, in what prison is he kept?

Convert.
   In Sylla's tower, that dwelling of despair.

Cor.
   Guarded by Romans?

Convert.
   Yes; and strongly guarded.

Cor.
   Yet, he shall be released.

Father

 to Cordenius .
   Beware, my son, of rash, imprudent zeal:
   The truth hath suffer'd much from this; beware:
   Risk not thyself: thy life is also precious.

Cor.
   My whole of life is precious: but this shred,
   This earthly portion of it, what is that,
   But as it is employ'd in holy acts?
   Am I Christ's soldier at a poorer rate
   Than I have served an earthly master? No;
   I feel within my glowing breast a power
   Which says I am commission'd for this service.
   Give me thy blessing—thy baptismal blessing,
   And then God's spirit guide me! Serving God,
   I will not count the cost but to discharge it.

Father.
   His will direct thee then, my gen'rous son!
   His blessing be upon thee!—Lead him, Sylvius,
   To the blest fount, where from his former sins
   He shall by heavenly grace be purified.


 Exeunt.
SCENE II.
The garden of Sulpicius .

Enter Sulpicius and Portia , with flowers in her hand.
Portia.
   Was it not well to rise with early morn
   And pay my homage to sweet Flora? Never
   Were flowers by mid-day cull'd, so fair, so fragrant,
   With blending streaky tints, so fresh and bright.
   See: twinkling dew-drops lurk in every bell,
   And on the fibred leaves stray far apart,
   Like little rounded gems of silver sheen,
   While curling tendrils grasp with vigorous hold
   The stem that bears them! All looks young and fresh.
   The very spider through his circled cage
   Of wiry woof, amongst the buds suspended,
   Scarce seems a loathly thing, but like the small
   Imprison'd bird of some capricious nymph.
   Is it not so, my father?

Sul.
   Yes, morn and youth and freshness sweetly join,
   And are the emblems of dear changeful days.
   By night those beauteous things—

Portia.
                                            And what of night?
   Why do you check your words? You are not sad?

Sul.
   No, Portia; only angry with myself
   For crossing thy gay stream of youthful thoughts
   With those of sullen age. Away with them!
   What if those bright-leaved flowers, so soft and silken,
   Are gather'd into dank and wrinkled folds
   When evening chills them, or upon the earth,
   With broken stems and buds torn and dispersed,
   Lie prostrate, of fair form and fragrance reft
   When midnight winds pass o'er them; be it so!
   All things but have their term.
   In truth, my child, I'm glad that I indulged thee
   By coming forth at such an early hour
   To pay thy worship to so sweet a goddess,
   Upon her yearly feast.

Portia.
   I thank you, father! On her feast, 'tis said,
   That she, from mortal eye conceal'd, vouchsafes
   Her presence in such sweet and flowery spots:
   And where due offerings on her shrine are laid,
   Blesses all seeds and shoots, and things of promise.



 
Sul.
   How many places in one little day
   She needs must visit then!

Portia.
   But she moves swift as thought. The hasty zephyr,
   That stirr'd each slender leaf, now as we enter'd,
   And made a sudden sound, by stillness follow'd,
   Might be the rapid rustling of her robe.

Sul.
   A pleasing fancy, Portia, for the moment,
   Yet wild as pleasing.

Portia.
                                            Wherefore call it wild?
   Full many a time I've listen'd when alone
   In such fair spots as this, and thought I heard
   Sweet mingled voices uttering varied tones
   Of question and reply, pass on the wind,
   And heard soft steps upon the ground; and then
   The notion of bright Venus or Diana,
   Or goddess-nymphs, would come so vividly
   Into my mind, that I am almost certain
   Their radiant forms were near me, though conceal'd
   By subtle drapery of the ambient air.
   And oh, how I have long'd to look upon them!
   An ardent strange desire, though mix'd with fear.
   Nay, do not smile, my father: such fair sights
   Were seen — were often seen in ancient days:
   The poets tell us so.
   But look, the Indian roses I have foster'd
   Are in full bloom; and I must gather them.


 Exit eagerly.
Sul.

 alone .
   Go, gentle creature, thou art careless yet.
   Ah! couldst thou so remain, and still with me
   Be as in years gone by!—It may not be;
   Nor should I wish it: all things have their season:
   She may not now remain an old man's treasure,
   With all her woman's beauty grown to blossom.
Enter Orceres.

   The Parthian prince at such an early hour?

Or.
   And who considers hours, whose heart is bent
   On what concerns a lover and a friend?
   Where is thy daughter?

Sul.
   Within yon flowery thicket, blithe and careless;
   For though she loves, 'tis with sweet, maiden fancy,
   That, not impatient, looks in cheering hope
   To future years.

Or.
                                            Ay, 'tis a shelter'd passion,
   A cradled love, by admiration foster'd:
   A showy, toward nurse for babe so bashful.
   Thus in the shell, athwart whose snowy lining
   Each changeful tint of the bright rainbow plays,
   A little pearl is found, in secret value
   Surpassing all the rest.

Sul.
                                            But sayst thou nothing
   Of what I wish to hear? What of Cordenius?

Or.
   By my good war-bow and its barbed shafts!
   By the best war-horse archer e'er bestrode!
   I'm still in ignorance; I have not seen him.

Sul.
   Thou hast not seen him! this is very strange.

Or.
   So it indeed appears.—My wayward friend
   Has from his home been absent. Yesterday,
   There and elsewhere I sought, but found him not.
   This morning by the dawn again I sought him,
   Thinking to find him surely and alone;
   But his domestics, much amazed, have told me,
   He is not yet return'd.

Sul.
   Hush! through yon thicket I perceive a man.

Or.
   Some thief or spy.

Sul.
   Let us withdraw awhile,
                                            And mark his motions; he observes us not.


Enter Cordenius from a thicket in the background.
Cor.

 after looking round him with delight .
   Sweet light of day, fair sky, and verdant earth,
   Enrich'd with every beauteous herb and flower,
   And stately trees, that spread their boughs, like tents,
   For shade and shelter, how I hail you now!
   Ye are His works, who made such fair abodes
   For happy innocence, yet, in the wreck
   Of foul perversion, has not cast us off.

 Stooping to look at the flowers.
   Ye little painted things, whose varied hues
   Charm, e'en to wonderment; that mighty hand
   Which dyes the mountain's peak with rosy tints
   Sent from the rising sun, and to the barb'd
   Destructive lightning gives its ruddy gleam,
   Grand and terrific, thus adorns even you!
   There is a father's full unstinted love
   Display'd o'er all, and thus on all I gaze
   With the keen thrill of new-waked ecstasy.
   What voice is that so near me and so sweet?


Portia without, singing some notes of prelude, and then a song.
SONG.
   The lady in her early bower
   Is blest as been in morning flower;
   The lady's eye is flashing bright,
   Like water in the morning light;
   The lady's song is sweet and loud,
   Like skylark o'er the morning cloud;
   The lady's smiles are smiles that pass
   Like morning's breath o'er wavy grass.

   She thinks of one, whose harness'd car
   In triumph comes from distant war;
   She thinks of one whose martial state
   Will darken Rome's imperial gate;
   She thinks of one, with laurel crown'd,
   Who shall with sweeter wreaths be bound.
   Voice, eye, and smiles, in mingled play,
   The lady's happy thoughts betray.
Cor.
   Her voice indeed, and this my fav'rite song!
   It is that gentle creature, my sweet Portia.
   I call her mine, because she is the image
   Which hath possess'd my fancy. Such vain thoughts


 
   Must now give place. I will not linger here.
   This is the garden of Sulpicius;
   How have I miss'd my path? She sings again.

 Sings without, as before.
   She wanders fitfully from lay to lay,
   But all of them some air that I have praised
   In happy hours gone by.

SONG.    The kind heart speaks with words so kindly sweet,
   That kindred hearts the catching tones repeat;
   And love, therewith, his soft sigh gently blending,
   Makes pleasing harmony. Thus softly sending
   Its passing cheer across the stilly main,
   While in the sounding water dips the oar,
   And glad response bursts from the nearing shore,
   Comes to our ears the home-bound seamen's strain,
   Who from the lofty deck hail their own land again.
Cor.
   O gentle, sweet, and cheerful! form'd to be
   Whate'er my heart could prize of treasured love!
   Dear as thou art, I will not linger here.


Re-enter Sulpicius and Orceres , breaking out upon him, and Orceres catching hold of his robe as he is going off.
Or.
   Ha! noble Maro, to a coward turn'd,
   Shunning a spot of danger!

Sul.
                                            Stay, Cordenius.
   The fellest foe thou shalt contend with here,
   Is she thou callst so gentle. As for me,
   I do not offer thee this hand more freely
   Than I will grant all that may make thee happy,
   If Portia has that power.

Cor.
   And dost thou mean, in very earnest mean,
   That thou wilt give me Portia—thy dear Portia?
   My fancy catches wildly at thy words.

Sul.
   And truly too, Cordenius. She is thine,
   If thou wilt promise me to love her truly.

Cor.

 eagerly clasping the knees, and then kissing the hands of Sulpicius .
   Thanks, thanks! —thanks from my swoln, o'erflowing heart,
   Which has no words.—Friend, father, Portia's father!
   The thought creates in me such sudden joy,
   I am bewilder'd with it.

Sul.
                                            Calm thy spirits.—
   Thou shouldst in meeter form have known it sooner,
   Had not the execution of those Christians—
   Pests of the earth, whom on one burning pile,
   With all their kind, I would most gladly punish,
   Till now prevented me. Thy friend, Orceres—
   Thou owest him thanks—pled for thee powerfully,
   And had my leave. But dost thou listen to me?
   Thy face wears many colours, and big drops
   Burst from thy brow, whilst thy contracted lips
   Quiver, like one in pain.

Or.
                                            What sudden illness racks thee?

Cor.
   I may not tell you now: let me depart.

Sul.

 holding him .
   Thou art my promised son; I have a right
   To know whate'er concerns thee,—pain or pleasure.

Cor.
   And so thou hast, and I may not deceive thee.
   Take, take, Sulpicius.—O such with'ring words!
   The sinking, sick'ning heart and parched mouth!
   I cannot utter them.

Sul.
                                            Why in this agony of perturbation?
   Nay, strive not now to speak.

Cor.
                                            I must, I must!—
   Take back thy proffer'd gift; all earth could give;—
   That which it cannot give I must retain.

Sul.
   What words were these? If it were possible,
   I could believe thee touch'd with sorcery,
   The cursed art of those vile Nazarenes.
   Where hast thou pass'd the night? their haunts are near.

Or.
   Nay, nay; repress thine anger; noble Maro
   May not be question'd thus.

Sul.
   He may and shall. And yet I will not urge him,
   If he, with hand press'd on his breast, will say,
   That he detests those hateful Nazarenes.

Cor.
   No; though my life, and what is dearer far,
   My Portia's love, depended on the words,
   I would not, and I durst not utter them.

Sul.
   I see it well: thou art ensnared and blinded
   By their enchantments. Demoniac power
   Will drag thee to thy ruin. Cast it off;
   Defy it. Say thou wilt forbear all intercourse
   With this detested sect. Art thou a madman?

Cor.
   If I am mad, that which possesses me
   Outvalues all philosophers e'er taught,
   Or poets e'er imagined.—Listen to me.
   Call ye these Christians vile, because they suffer
   Pains nature shrinks from, rather than deny
   What seems to them the truth? Call ye them sorcerers,
   Because their words impart such high conceptions
   Of power creative and parental love,
   In one great Being join'd, as makes the heart
   Bound with ennobling thoughts? Call ye them curst,
   Who daily live in steady strong assurance
   Of endless blessedness? O, listen to me!


Re-enter Portia , bursting from a thicket close to them.
Portia.
   O, listen to him, father!

Sul.
   Let go my robe, fond creature! Listen to him!
   The song of syrens were less fatal. Charms
   Of dire delusion, luring on to ruin,
   Are mingled with the words that speak their faith;
   They, who once hear them, flutter round destruction
   With giddy fascination, like the moth,
   Which, shorn of half its form, all scorch'd and shrivell'd,
   Still to the torch returns. I will not listen;
   No, Portia, nor shalt thou.



 
Portia.
                                            O, say not so!
   For if you listen to him, you may save him,
   And win him from his errors.

Sul.
   Vain hope! vain hope! What is man's natural reason
   Opposed to demon subtlety? Cordenius!
   Cordenius Maro! I adjure thee, go!
   Leave me; why wouldst thou pull destruction on me?
   On one who loved thee so, that though possess'd
   Of but one precious pearl, most dearly priz'd,
   Prized more than life, yet would have given it to thee.
   I needs must weep: e'en for thyself I weep.

Cor.
   Weep not, my kind Sulpicius! I will leave thee,
   Albeit the pearl thou wouldst bestow upon me
   Is, in my estimation, dearer far
   Than life, or power, or fame, or earthly thing.
   When these fierce times are past, thou wilt, perhaps,
   Think of me with regard, but not with pity,
   How fell soe'er my earthly end hath been,
   For I shall then be blest. And thou, dear Portia,
   Wilt thou remember me? That thought, alas!
   Dissolves my soul in weakness.—
   O, to be spared, if it were possible,
   This stroke of agony! Is it not possible,
   That I might yet—Almighty God forgive me!
   Weak thoughts will lurk in the devoted heart,
   But not be cherish'd there. I may not offer
   Aught short of all to Thee!—
   Farewell, farewell! sweet Portia, fare thee well!

 Orceres catches hold of him to prevent his going.
   Retain me not: I am a Parthian now.
   My strength is in retreat.


 Exit.
Portia.
   That noble mind! and must it then be ruin'd?
   O save him, save him, father! Brave Orceres,
   Wilt thou not save thy friend, the noble Maro?

Or.
   We will, sweet maid, if it be possible.
   We'll keep his faith a secret in our breasts;
   And he may yet, if not by circumstances
   Provoked to speak, conceal it from the world.

Portia.
   And you, my father?

Sul.
                                            I will not betray him.

Portia.
   Then all may yet be well; for our great gods,
   Whom Cæsar and his subject-nations worship,
   Will not abandon Rome's best, bravest soldier
   To power demoniac. That can never be,
   If they indeed regard us.

Or.
   Were he in Parthia, our great god, the sun,
   Or rather he who in that star resides,
   Would not permit his power to be so thwarted
   For all the demonry that e'er exerted
   Its baleful influence on wretched men.
   Beshrew me! for a thought gleams through my brain
   It is this God, perhaps, with some new name,
   Which these bewilder'd Nazarenes adore.

Sul.
   With impious rites, most strange and horrible.

Or.
   If he, my friend, in impious rites hath join'd,
   Demons, indeed, have o'er the soul of man
   A power to change its nature. Ay, Sulpicius;
   And thou and I may, ere a day shall pass,
   Be very Nazarenes. We are in ignorance;
   We shoot our arrow in the dark, and cry,
   “It is to wound a foe.” Come, gentle Portia;
   Be not so sad; the man thou lovest is virtuous,
   And brave, and loves thee well; why then despair?

Portia.
   Alas! I know that he is brave and virtuous,
   Therefore, I do despair.

Or.
                                            In Nero's court,
   Such men are ever on the brink of danger,
   But wouldst thou have him other than he is?

Portia.
   O no! I would not; that were base and sordid;
   Yet shed I tears, even like a wayward child
   Who weeps for that which cannot be attain'd,—
   Virtue, and constancy, and safety join'd.
   I pray thee pardon me, for I am wretched,
   And that hath made me foolish and perverse.


 Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Before the gate of Nero 's palace: guards, with their officers, discovered on duty.

Enter to them another officer, speaking, as he enters, to the soldiers.
 st offi.
   Strike up some sacred strain of Roman triumph;
   The Pontiff comes to meet the summon'd council.
   Omit not this respect, else he will deem
   We are of those who love the Nazarenes.
   Sing loud and clearly.


Enter Pontiff, attended.
SACRED HYMN
by the soldiers.
   That chief, who bends to Jove the suppliant knee,
   Shall firm in power and high in honour be;
   And who to Mars a soldier's homage yields,
   Shall laurell'd glory reap in bloody fields;
   Who vine-crown'd Bacchus, bounteous lord, adores,
   Shall gather still, unscath'd, his vintage stores;
   Who to fair Venus lib'ral off'ring gives,
   Enrich'd with love and sweet affection lives.
   Then, be your praises still our sacred theme,
   O Venus, Bacchus, Mars, and Jove supreme!
Pontiff.
   I thank you, soldiers! Rome, indeed, hath triumph'd,


 
   Bless'd in the high protection of her gods,
   The sov'reign warrior-nation of the world;
   And, favour'd by great Jove and mighty Mars,
   So may she triumph still, nor meanly stoop
   To worship strange and meaner deities,
   Adverse to warlike glory.


 Exit, with his train.
 st offi.
   The Pontiff seems disturb'd, his brow is lowering.

 d offi.
   Reproof and caution, mingled with his thanks,
   Though utter'd graciously.

 st offi.
                                            He is offended,
   Because of late so many valiant soldiers
   Have proselytes become to this new worship;
   A worship too, as he insinuates,
   Unsuited to the brave.

 d offi.
   Ay, ay! the sacred chickens are in danger.

 d offi.
   Sylvius is suspected, as I hear.

 st offi.
   Hush! let us to our duty; it is time
   To change the inner guard.


 Exeunt, with music, into the gate of the palace.
SCENE II.
A council-chamber in the palace : Nero with his councillors discovered ; Nero in the act of speaking.
Nero.
   Yes, Servius; formerly we have admitted,
   As minor powers, amongst the ancient gods
   Of high imperial Rome, the foreign deities
   Of friendly nations; but these Nazarenes
   Scorn such association, proudly claiming
   For that which is the object of their faith,
   Sole, undivided homage: and our altars,
   Our stately temples, the majestic forms
   Of Mars, Apollo, thund'ring Jove himself,
   By sculptor's art divine so nobly wrought,
   Are held by these mad zealots in contempt.
   Examine, sayst thou! shall imperial Cæsar
   Deign to examine what withstands his power?
   I marvel at thy folly, Servius Sillus.


Enter an Officer.
Offi.
   The Pontiff, mighty Cæsar, waits without
   And craves admittance.

Nero.
                                            Let him be admitted.
Enter Pontiff.

   Pontiff, thy visage, if I read it well,
   Says that some weighty matter brings thee here:
   Thou hast our leave to speak.

Pontiff.
   Imperial Nero, didst thou not condemn,
   That eloquent, but pestilential Nazarene,
   The Grecian Ethocles, whose specious words
   Wrap in delusion all who listen to him,
   Spreading his baleful errors o'er the world?

Nero.
   Did I condemn him! E'en this very day,
   He in the Amphitheatre meets his doom;
   Having, I trust, no power of words to charm
   The enchafed lion, or the famish'd wolf.

Pontiff.
   I am inform'd, and I believe it true,
   That this bold malefactor is enlarged.

Nero.
   It is impossible! Cordenius Maro
   Is sworn to guard the prisoner; or, failing,
   How could he fail?
   to pay with his own life
   The forfeit. But behold his fav'rite friend,
   The Parthian prince, who will inform us truly.
Enter Orceres , followed by Sulpicius.

   Orceres, is thy friend Cordenius coming?
   I have commanded him, and at this hour,
   To bring his guarded prisoner to the palace,
   Here to remain till the appointed time.

Or.
   I know not; nor have I beheld Cordenius
   Since yesterday; when, at an early hour,
   Sulpicius and myself met him by chance:
   But for the prisoner, he is at hand,
   E'en at the palace gate; for as we enter'd
   We saw him there, well circled round with guards,
   Though in the martial throng we saw not Maro.

Nero

 to the pontiff .
   Said I not so?

 To an officer. 
   Command them instantly
   To bring this wordy Grecian to our presence.

 Exit officer.
   Sulpicius, thou hast known this Ethocles;
   Is he a madman or ambitious knave,
   Who sought on human folly to erect
   A kind of fancied greatness for himself?

Sul.
   I know not which, great Nero.

Nero.
   And didst thou not advise me earnestly
   To rid the state of such a pestilence?

Sul.
   And so I still advise thee; for this Greek
   Is dang'rous above all, who with their lives,
   Have yet paid forfeit for their strange belief.
   They come: the prisoner in foreign garb
   So closely wrapp'd, I scarcely see his face.


Enter prisoner, attended.
Pontiff.
   If it in truth be he.

Nero

 to the pontiff .
   Dost thou still doubt?

 To the prisoner. 
   Stand forth, audacious rebel to my will!
   Dost thou still brave it, false and subtle spirit?

Cor.

 throwing off his Grecian cloak, and advancing to Nero .
   I am not false, Augustus; but if subtle,
   Add to my punishment what shall be deem'd
   Meet retribution. I have truly sworn,
   Or to produce thy thrall, or, therein failing,
   To give my life for his; and here I stand.
   Ethocles, by a higher power than thine,
   Is yet reserved for great and blessed ends.
   Take thou the forfeit; I have kept my oath.

Nero.
   I am amazed beyond the power of utt'rance!
   Grows it to such a pitch that Rome's brave captains
   Are by this wizard sorcery so charm'd?
   Then it is time, good sooth! that sweeping vengeance
   Should rid the earth of every tainted thing


 
   Which that curst sect hath touch'd. Cordenius Maro,
   Thou who hast fought our battles, graced our state,
   And borne a noble Roman's honour'd name,
   What, O what power could tempt thee to this shame?

Cor.
   I have been tempted by that mighty Power
   Who gave to Rome her greatness, to the earth
   Form and existence; yea, and to the soul
   Of living, active man, sense and perception:
   But not to shame, O Cæsar! not to shame!

Nero.
   What, hast thou not become a Nazarene,
   As now I apprehended? Say, thou hast not;
   And though thy present act is most audacious,
   Yet will I spare thy life.

Cor.
   If thou wouldst spare my life, and to that grace
   Add all the wealth of Rome, and all the power
   Of Rome's great lord, I would not for the bribe
   Be other than I am, or what I am
   Basely deny.

Nero.
   Thou art a Christian, then? Thou art a maniac!

Cor.
   I am a man, who, seeing in the flames
   Those dauntless Christians suffer, long'd to know
   What power could make them brave the fear of death,
   Disgrace, and infamy. And I have learnt
   That they adore a God,—one God, supreme,
   Who, over all men, His created sons,
   Rules as a father; and beholding sin,
   Growth of corruption, mar this earthly race,
   Sent down to earth His sinless heavenly son,
   Who left, with generous devoted love,
   His state of exaltation and of glory,
   To win them back to virtue, yea, to virtue
   Which shall be crown'd with never-ending bliss.
   I've learnt that they with deep adoring gratitude
   Pay homage to that Son, the sent of God,
   Who here became a willing sacrifice
   To save mankind from sin and punishment,
   And earn for them a better life hereafter,
   When mortal life is closed. The heart's deep homage
   Becometh well such creatures, so redeem'd.

Nero.
   Out on that dreaming madness!

Cor.
                                            Is it madness
   To be the humble follower of Him,
   Who left the bliss of heaven to be for us
   A man on earth, in spotless virtue living,
   As man ne'er lived: such words of comfort speaking,
   To rouse, and elevate, and cheer the heart,
   As man ne'er spoke; and suff'ring poverty,
   Contempt, and wrong, and pain, and death itself,
   As man ne'er suffer'd? O, if this be madness,
   Which makes each generous impulse of my nature
   Warm into ecstasy, each towering hope
   Rise to the noblest height of bold conception;
   That which is reason call'd, and yet has taught you
   To worship different gods in every clime,
   As dull and wicked as their worshippers,
   Compared to it, is poor, confined, and mean,
   As is the Scythian's curtain'd tent, compared
   With the wide range of fair, expanded nature.

Nero.
   Away, away, with all those lofty words!
   They but bewilder thee.

Cor.
   Yet hear them, Nero! O resist them not!
   Perhaps they are appointed for thy good,
   And for the good of thousands. When these hands
   Which have so oft done Rome a soldier's service,
   This tongue which speaks to thee, are turn'd to ashes,
   What now appears so wild and fanciful,
   May be remember'd with far other feelings.
   It is not life that I request of Nero,
   Although I said these hands have fought for Rome.
   No; in the presence of these senators,
   First bind thyself by every sacred oath
   To give this body to the flames, then hear me;
   O could I speak what might convince Rome's chief,
   Her senators, her tribes, her meanest slaves,
   Of Christ's most blessed truth, the fatal pile
   Would be to me a car of joyful triumph,
   Mounted more gladly than the laurell'd hero
   Vaults to his envied seat, while Rome's throng'd streets
   Resound his shouted name. Within me stirs
   The spirit of truth and power which spoke to me,
   And will upon thy mind—

Nero.
                                            I charge thee cease!

Or.
   Nay, Emperor! might I entreat for him?

Cor.

 catching hold of Orceres eagerly .
   Not for my life.

Or.
                                            No; not for that, brave Maro!

 To Nero. 
   Let me entreat that he may freely speak.
   Fearst thou he should convince thee by his words?
   That were a foul affront to thine own reason,
   Or to the high divinities of Rome.

Nero.
   Cease, Prince of Parthia! nor too far presume
   Upon a noble stranger's privilege.

Pontiff.
   Shall words so bold be to thine car august
   So freely utter'd with impunity?

Or.
   Pontiff; I much revere thy sacred office,
   But scorn thy paltry words. Not freely speak!
   Not with impunity! Is this a threat?
   Let Rome's great master, or his angry slaves,
   Shed one drop of my blood, and on our plains,
   Where heretofore full many a Roman corse,
   With Parthian arrows pierced, have vultures fed,
   Twice thirty thousand archers in array,
   Each with his bow strain'd for the distant mark,
   Shall quickly stand, impatient for revenge.
   Not with impunity!

Sul.
   Nay, nay, Orceres! with such haughty words
   Thou'lt injure him thou pleadst for. Noble Cæsar!


 
   Permit an aged man, a faithful servant,
   To speak his thoughts. This brave deluded youth
   Is now, as I sincerely do believe,
   Beneath the power of strong and dire enchantment.
   Hear not his raving words, but spare his life;
   And when its power for all delusion holds
   Its power but for a season shall be spent,
   He will himself entreat your clemency,
   And be again the soldier of the state,
   Brave and obedient. Do not hear him now:
   Command him to retire.

Cor.
   I thank thee, good Sulpicius, but my life,
   For which thou pleadst, take no account of that;
   I yield it freely up to any death,
   Cruel or merciful, which the decree
   Of Cæsar shall inflict, for leave to speak
   E'en but a few short moments. Princely Nero!
   The strong enchantment which deludes my soul
   Is, that I do believe myself the creature,
   Subject, and soldier, if I so may speak,
   Of an Almighty Father, King, and Lord,
   Before whose presence, when my soul shall be
   Of flesh and blood disrobed, I shall appear,
   There to remain with all the great and good
   That e'er have lived on earth, yea, and with spirits,
   Higher than earth e'er own'd, in such pure bliss
   As human heart conceives not,—if my life,
   With its imperfect virtue, find acceptance
   From pard'ning love and merey; but, if otherwise,
   That I shall pass into a state of misery
   With souls of wicked men and wrathful demons:
   That I believe this earth on which we stand
   Is but the vestibule to glorious mansions,
   Through which a moving crowd for ever press;
   And do regard the greatest Prince, who now
   Inflicts short torment on this flesh, as one
   Who but in passing rudely rends my robe.
   And thinkest thou that I, believing this,
   Will shrink to do His will whom I adore?
   Or thinkest thou this is a senseless charm,
   That soon will pass away?

Nero.
   High words, indeed, if resting on good proof!
   A maniac's fancies may be grand and noble.

Cor.
   Ay, now thou list'nest, as a man should listen,
   With an inquiring mind. Let me produce
   The proofs which have constrain'd me to believe,
   From written lore and well-attested facts;—
   Let me produce my proofs, and it may be
   The Spirit of Truth may touch thy yielding heart,
   And save thee from destruction.

Nero.
   Ha! dost thou think to make of me a convert?
   Away, weak fool! and most audacious rebel!
   Give proofs of thy obedience, not thy faith,
   If thou wouldst earn thy pardon.

Cor.
   If thou condemn me in the flames to die,
   I will and must obey thee; if to live,
   Disgraced by pardon won through treachery
   To God, my King supreme, and His bless'd Christ,
   I am, indeed, thy disobedient rebel.

Nero.
   And shall as such most dearly pay the forfeit.
   Out!—take him from my presence till the time
   Of public execution!
   Cordenius Maro, thou shalt fall this day
   By no ignoble foe;—a noble lion
   Famish'd and fierce shall be thy adversary.
   And dost thou smile and raise thy head at this,
   In stately confidence?

Cor.
   God will deliver me from every adversary.
   And thou too smilest.—Yes; he will deliver
   That which I call myself. For this poor form
   Which vests me round, I give it to destruction,
   As gladly as the storm-beat traveller,
   Who, having reach'd his destined place of shelter,
   Drops at the door his mantle's cumbrous weight.

Nero

 going .
   Then to thy visionary hopes I leave thee,
   Incorrigible man! Here, in this chamber
   Keep him secure till the appointed hour.

 To the officers, &c.
   Off, good Sulpicius! hang not on me thus!

Sul.
   O mighty Cæsar! countermand your orders:
   Delay it but a month, a week, a day.


 Exeunt Nero, Sulpicius , senators, &c. , Sulpicius still keeping close to Nero in the act of supplication. — Orceres, Cordenius , and guards remain, the guards standing respectfully at a distance in the background.
Or.
   Noble Cordenius! can thy martial spirit
   Thus brook to be a public spectacle,
   Fighting with savage beasts, the sport of fools,
   Till thou shalt fall, deform'd and horrible,
   Mangled and piecemeal torn? It must not be.

Cor.
   Be not so moved, Orceres; I can bear it:
   The God I worship, who hath made me humble,
   Hath made me dauntless too. And for the shame
   Which, as I guess, disturbs thee most, my Master,
   The Lord and Leader I have sworn to follow,
   Did as a malefactor end his days,
   To save a lost, perverted race: shall I
   Feel degradation, then, in following Him?

Or.
   In this, alas! thou'lt follow Him too surely;
   But whither, noble Maro?

Cor.
   E'en to my destined home, my Father's


house.
Or.
   And where is that? O, canst thou tell me where?
   Beyond the ocean, or beneath the earth?
   Be there more worlds than this, beyond our ken
   In regions vast, above the lofty stars?
   Could we through the far stretch of space descry
   E'en but the distant verge, though dimly mark'd,
   Of any other world, I would believe
   That virtuous men deceased have in good truth
   A destined place of rest.



 
Cor.
   Believe it—O, believe it, brave Orceres!

Or.
   I'll try to do it. I'll become a Christian,
   Were it but only to defy this tyrant.

Cor.
   Thou must receive with a far different spirit
   The faith of Jesus Christ. Perhaps thou wilt.
   My heart leaps at the thought. When I am dead,
   Remain in Rome no longer. In the East
   Search thou for Ethocles, whom I have rescued;
   And if he shall convert thee, O how richly
   He will repay all I have done for him!—
   But I would now withdraw a little space,
   To pour my thoughts in prayer and thankfulness
   To Him, the great, the good, the wise, the just,
   Who holds man's spirit in His own high keeping,
   And now supports my soul, and will support it,
   Till my appointed task is done. In secret
   The hearts by Jesus taught were bid to pray,
   And, if it be permitted, so will I.

 To the guards, who advance as he speaks to them. 
   My guards, and, some time past, my fellow soldiers,
   Let me remain alone a little while,
   And fear not my escape. If ye distrust me,
   Watch well the door, and bind my hands with chains!

 st offi.
   Yes, brave Cordenius, to another chamber
   Thou mayst retire, and we will watch without.
   But be thy person free: we will not bind,
   With felon cord or chain, those valiant hands,
   Which have so often for thy country fought,
   Until we are commanded.

Cor.
   I thank you all, my friends, and I believe
   That I shall meet and thank you too hereafter;
   For there is something in you God must love.

 To  st officer. 
   And, loving, will not give to reprobation.
   Codrus, thou once didst put thy life in hazard,
   And suffer much to save a helpless Greek
   Who sought protection of thee.

 Turning to the  d officer. 
   Ay, and thou,
   Young Lelius, once a rich and tempting ransom
   Didst freely to a captive wretch remit.
   Ye are of those whom Jesus came to save:
   Yes; we shall meet hereafter.

 To  d officer. 
   And thou, my former enemy, weep'st thou?
   We're enemies no more; thou art my brother.
   I will retire; my little term of life
   Runs fleetly on; I must not spend it thus.


 Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A crowded amphitheatre : Nero and the senators discovered in the background sitting in state ; Portia , by the side of Nero , in the act of supplication.

Enter Sulpicius on the front, meeting with another noble Roman.
Sul.

 eagerly .
   Is he advancing?

Noble Roman.
                                            Yes, and close at hand,
   Surrounded by a group of martial friends.
   Oft have I seen him on a day of battle
   March to the charge with noble portly gait;
   But now he treads the ground with buoyant steps
   Which from its surface spring, as though he press'd
   Substance of renovating power. His form
   Seems stately and enlarged beyond its wont;
   And in his countenance, oft turn'd to heaven,
   There is a look as if some god dwelt in him.

Sul.
   How do the people greet him?

Noble Roman.
                                            Every face
   Gazing upon him, turns, with transit quick,
   Pity to admiration. Warlike veterans
   Are shedding tears like infants. As he pass'd
   The legion he commanded in Armenia,
   They raised a shout as if a victor came,
   Saluting him with long and loud applause,
   None daring to reprove them.

 Noise without of shouting.
   Hark! he comes.


Enter Cordenius , followed by Orceres and Sylvius , and attended by other friends, with guards, &c.
Sul.

 advancing eagerly to meet him .
   Cordenius, Cordenius, hear a friend,
   A faithful ancient friend; thy Portia's father!
   At Nero's footstool she is pleading for thee,
   And will not plead in vain, if thou wilt testify
   A yielding mind, a willingness to live.

Cor.
   I am so pleased to die, and am so honour'd
   In dying for the pure and holy truth,
   That nature's instinct seems in me extinguish'd.
   But if the Emperor freely pardon me,
   I shall believe it is the will of God
   That I should yet on earth promote His service,
   And, so believing, am content to live;
   Living or dying, to His will resign'd.


Enter Portia on the front, and catching hold of Cordenius with eagerness and great agitation.
Portia.
   Cordenius, thou art pardon'd! Nero spares thee,
   If thou wilt only say thou art a Roman,
   In heart and faith, as all thy fathers were,
   Or but forbear to say thou art a Christian.

Cor.
   Thanks, gentle Portia! life preserved by thee,
   E'en to be spent in want and contumely,
   Rather than grieve thy kind and tender heart,
   My dearest, gentlest friend! I had accepted:
   But to deny my God, and put dishonour
   Upon the noblest, most exalted faith
   That ever was to human thoughts reveal'd,


 
   Is what I will not—yea, and though a Roman,
   A noble Roman, and a soldier too,
   I dare not do. Let Nero have this answer.

Portia.
   No, not this answer, Maro; not this answer!
   Cast not life from thee, dear, most dear Cordenius!
   Life, too, which I should spend my life in cheering,
   Cast it not from thee like a worthless thing.

Cor.
   Because it is not worthless but most precious,
   And now, when dear to thee, more precious far
   Than I have e'er esteem'd it, 'tis an offering
   More meet for God's acceptance;
   Withheld from Him, not even thyself, sweet maid,
   Couldst cheer its course, nor yet couldst thou be happy.

Portia.
   Nay, but I could!—to see thee still alive,
   And by my side, mine own redeemed friend,
   Should I not then be happy?

Cor.
   I should be by thy side, dear love! but thou,
   With all thy excellence, couldst have no happiness,
   Mated with one, whose living form alone
   Could move upon the earth, while far adrift
   His mind would dwell by ceaseless meditation,
   In other worlds of blessedness or woe;
   Lost to the one, and to the other link'd
   By horrid sympathy, till his wrench'd nature
   Should to a demon's fell and restless spirit
   At last be changed.

Portia.
   Alas, alas! and dost thou then believe
   That nought remains for thee but death or misery?

Cor.
   No, gentle Portia! firmly I believe
   That I shall live in endless happiness,
   And with the blest hereafter shall behold
   Thy blessed self with ecstasy of love,
   Exceeding every thought of earth-born passion,
   As the fair morning star in lovely brightness
   Excels a night-fly, twinkling through the gloom.
   Live in this hope, dear Portia! hold it fast;
   And may His blessing rest upon thy head,
   Who loves the loving and the innocent!
   Farewell, in love and hope! farewell, in peace!
   Farewell, in quick'ning faith,—in holy joy!

Portia

 clasping his knees .
   Nay, let me yet conjure thee!
   Make me not wretched, I who once was happy,
   And happiest of all in loving thee.

Cor.
   This is my anguish and my suffering!
   O, good Sulpicius, bear her to her home.

Sul.

 leading her gently away, while she still clings to him .
   Forbear, my child, thy tears are all in vain.


Enter a Lictor.
Lictor.
   Cæsar forbids all further interruption
   To his imperial sentence. Let Cordenius
   Forthwith prepare him for the fatal fight.
   This is mine office, and I must perform it.

 Begins to disrobe Cordenius , while Portia shrieks aloud, and is carried off in the arms of her father.
   Disrobe thee, Maro, of those martial weeds.

Cor.
   Gladly! for Him I serve;—my glorious Master
   Hath braced me with an armour that defies
   All hostile things; in which I'll strive more proudly
   Than I have ever fought in field or breach
   With Rome's or Nero's foes.

Lictor.
   Cæsar desires thee also to remember,
   That no ignoble audience, e'en thy Emperor,
   And all the states of Rome, behold thy deeds.

Cor.
   Tell him my deeds shall witness'd be by those
   Compared to whom the Emperor of Rome,
   With all her high estates, are but as insects
   Hov'ring at mid-day o'er some tainted marsh.
   I know full well that no ignoble audience
   Are present, though from mortal eyes conceal'd.
   Farewell, my friends! kind, noble friends, farewell!

 Apart to Sylvius , while Orceres goes off, re-appearing in another part of the theatre.
   Sylvius, farewell! If thou shouldst e'er be call'd
   To die a holy martyr for the truth,
   God give thee then the joy which now I feel.
   But keep thy faith conceal'd, till useful service
   Shall call thee to maintain it. God be with thee!

 Looking round. 
   Where is Orceres gone? I thought him near me.

Sylvius.
   'Tis but a moment since he left thy side
   With eager haste.

Cor.
   He would not see my death. I'm glad he's gone.
   Say I inquired for him, and say I bless'd him.
   —Now I am ready. Earthly friends are gone.
   Angels and blessed spirits! to your fellowship
   A few short pangs will bring me.
   —O, Thou, who didst upon the cross for us
   A willing suff'rer die, receive my soul!
   Almighty God and Sire, supreme o'er all,
   Pardon my sins and take me to Thyself!
   Accept the last words of my earthly lips:
   High hallelujah to Thy holy name!


 A lion now appears, issuing from a low door at the end of the stage, and Cordenius , advancing to meet it, enters the arena, when Orceres from a lofty stand amongst the spectators, sends an arrow from his bow, which pierces Cordenius through the heart. He then disappears, and re-entering below, catches hold of his hand as Sylvius supports him from falling to the ground.
Or.

 to Cordenius .
   Have I done well, my friend?—this is a death
   More worthy of a Roman.
   I made a vow in secret to my heart,


 
   That thou shouldst ne'er be made a mangled sight
   For gazing crowds and Nero's ruthless eye.

Sylvius.
   That dying look, which almost smiles upon thee,
   Tells thee thou hast done well; though words no more
   May pass from these clos'd lips, whose last, bless'd utterance
   Was the soul's purest and sublimest impulse.


 The curtain drops.

NOTES
 A strong fort in Armenia, taken by Corbullo in Nero's reign.
 NOTE TO THE DRAMA. For the better understanding of different allusions in the foregoing drama. I beg to transcribe a few passages from Fox's History of Martyrs, taken from Book I., which contains an account of the ten persecutions of the primitive church.
He says, on the authority of Justin Martyr,—“And whether earthquake, pestilence, or whatever public calamity befell, it was attributed to the Christians;” then is added “over and beside all these, a great occasion that stirred up the emperors against the Christians came by one Publius Tarquinius, the chief prelate of the idolatrous sacrifices, and Mamertinus, the chief governor of the city, in the time of Trajanus, who, partly with money, partly with sinister, pestilent counsaile, partly with infamous accusations, as witnesseth Nauclerus, incensed the mind of the emperor so much against God's people.”
In the account of the third persecution AN. , Eustasius, a great and victorious captain, is mentioned as suffering martyrdom, by order of the Emperor Adrian, who went to meet him on his return from conquest over the barbarians, but, upon Eustasius's refusing on the way to do sacrifice to Apollo for his victory, brought him to Rome and had him put to death.
In the fourth persecution AN. , it is mentioned that many Christian soldiers were found in the army of Marcus Aurelius:—
“As these aforesaid were going to their execution, there was a certain souldiour who in their defence took part against those who rayled upon them, for the which cause the people crying out against him, he was apprehended, and being constant in his profession, was forthwith beheaded.”
In the persecutions of Decius, several soldiers are mentioned as martyrs, some of whom had before concealed their faith: and in the tenth persecution, Mauritius, the captain of the Theban band, with his soldiers, to the number of  a number probably greatly exaggerated, are recorded as having been slain as martyrs by the order of Maximinian.
Tertullian, in his Apology for the Christians, mentions the slanderous accusations against them, of putting to death children and worshipping an ass's head. And when we consider how fond the ignorant are of excitement, arising from cruel, absurd, and wonderful stories, and how easily a misap-prehended and detached expression may be shaped by conjecture into a detailed transaction, such accusations were very probable and might be naturally expected; particularly when the unoffending meekness of their behaviour made supposed hidden atrocities more necessary for the justification of their persecutors.



Full text: BASIL. A TRAGEDY. Front matter PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.  MEN Count Basil , a general in the Emperor's service.
Count Rosinberg , his friend.
Duke of Mantua .
Gauriecio , his minister.
Valtomer , officer of Basil 's troops.
Frederic , officer of Basil 's troops.
Geoffry , an old soldier very much maimed in the wars.
Mirando , a little boy, a favourite of Victoria .
WOMEN Victoria , daughter to the Duke of Mantua.
Countess of Albini , friend and governess to Victoria .
Isabella , a lady attending upon Victoria .
Officers, soldiers, and attendants, masks, dancers, &c
The Scene is in Mantua, and its environs. Time supposed to be the sixteenth century, when Charles the Fifth defeated Francis the First, at the battle of Pavia.
 
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. An open street, crowded with people, who seem to be waiting in expectation of some show. Enter a Citizen. First Man.
Well, friend, what tidings of the grand procession? Cit.
I left it passing by the northern gate. Second Man.
I've waited long, I'm glad it comes at last. Young Man.
And does the princess look so wondrous fair
As fame reports? Cit.
She is the fairest lady of the train,—
Yet all the fairest beauties of the court
Are in her train. Old Man.
Bears she such off'rings to Saint Francis' shrine,
So rich, so marvellous rich, as rumour says?
—'Twill drain the treasury! Cit.
Since she, in all this splendid pomp returns
Her public thanks to the good patron Saint,
Who from his sick bed hath restor'd her father,
Thou wouldst not have her go with empty hands?
She loves magnificence.—                                           Discovering amongst the crowd old Geoffry.
Ha! art thou here, old remnant of the wars?
Thou art not come to see this courtly show,
Which sets the young agape? Geof.
I came not for the show; and yet, methinks,
It were a better jest upon me still,
If thou didst truly know my errand here. Cit.
I pri'thee say. Geof.
                                         What, must I tell it thee?
As o'er my evening fire I musing sat,
   Some few days since, my mind's eye backward turn'd
Upon the various changes I have pass'd—
How in my youth with gay attire allur'd,
And all the grand accountrements of war,
I left my peaceful home: then my first battles,
When clashing arms, and sights of blood were new:
Then all the after chances of the war:
Ay, and that field, a well-fought field it was,
When with an arm I speak not of it oft
Which now  pointing to his empty sleeve  thou seest is no arm of mine,
In a strait pass I stopp'd a thousand foes,
And turn'd my flying comrades to the charge;
For which good service, in his tented court,
My prince bestow'd a mark of favour on me;
While his fair consort, seated by his side,
The fairest lady e'er mine eyes beheld,
Gave me what more than all besides I priz'd,—
Methinks I see her still — a gracious smile —
'Twas a heart-kindling smile, — a smile of praise —
Well, musing thus on all my fortunes past,
A neighbour drew the latchet of my door,
And full of news from town, in many words
Big with rich names, told of this grand procession;
E'en as he spoke a fancy seiz'd my soul
To see the princess pass, if in her looks
   I yet might trace some semblance of her mother.
This is the simple truth; laugh as thou wilt.
I came not for the show. Enter an Officer. Officer to Geof.
Make way that the procession may have room:
Stand you aside, and let this man have place.                                           Pushing Geof . and endeavouring to put another in his place. Geof.
But that thou art the prince's officer,
I'd give thee back thy push with better blows. Officer.
What, wilt thou not give place? the prince is near:
I will complain to him, and have thee caged. Geof.
Yes, do complain, I pray; and when thou dost,
Say that the private of the tenth brigade,
Who sav'd his army on the Danube's bank,
And since that time a private hath remain'd,
Dares, as a citizen, his right maintain
Against thy insolence. Go tell him this,
And ask him then what dungeon of his tower
He'll have me thrust into. Cit. to Officer.
This is old Geoffry of the tenth brigade. Offi.
I knew him not: you should have told me sooner.                                           Exit, looking much ashamed. Martial music heard at a distance. Cit.
Hark, this is music of a warlike kind. Enter second Citizen.
To Sec. Cit. What sounds are these, good friend, which this way bear? Sec. Cit.
The brave Count Basil is upon his march,
To join the emperor with some chosen troops,
And doth as our ally through Mantua pass. Geof.
I've heard a good report of this young soldier. Sec. Cit.
   'Tis said he disciplines his men severely
And over-much affects the old commander,
Which seems ungracious in so young a man. Geof.
I know he loves not ease and revelry;
He makes them soldiers at no dearer rate
Than he himself hath paid. What, dost thou think,
That e'en the very meanest simple craft
Cannot without due diligence be learn'd,
And yet the nobler art of soldiership
May be attained by loit'ring in the sun?
Some men are born to feast and not to fight:
 

Whose sluggish minds, e'en in fair honour's field
Still on their dinner turn —
Let such pot-boiling varlets stay at home,
And wield a flesh-hook rather than a sword.
In times of easy service, true it is,
An easy careless chief, all soldiers love;
But O how gladly in the day of battle
Would they their jolly bottle-chief desert,
And follow such a leader as Count Basil!
So gath'ring herds, at pressing danger's call,
Confess the master deer.                                           Music is heard again, and nearer. Geof . walks up and down with a military triumphant step. Cit.
                                         What moves thee thus? Geof.
I've march'd to this same tune in glorious days.
My very limbs catch motion from the sound,
As they were young again. Sec. Cit.
                                         But here they come. Enter Count Basil , officers and soldiers in procession , with colours flying, and martial music. When they have marched half-way over the stage, an officer of the duke's enters from the opposite side, and speaks to Basil , upon which he gives a sign with his hand , and the martial music ceases; soft music is heard at a little distance, and Victoria , with a long procession of ladies, enters from the opposite side. The General &c. pay obeisance to her, as she passes; she stops to return it, and then goes off with her train. After which the military procession moves on, and Exeunt. Cit. to Geof.
   What thinkst thou of the princess? Geof.
                                            She is fair,
But not so fair as her good mother was.                                           Exeunt. SCENE II. A public walk on the ramparts of the town. Enter Count Rosinberg, Valtomer , and Frederic. — Valtomer enters by the opposite side of the stage, and meets them. Valt.
O what a jolly town for way-worn soldiers!
Rich steaming pots, and smell of dainty fare,
From every house salute you as you pass:
Light feats and juggler's tricks attract the eye;
Music and merriment in ev'ry street;
Whilst pretty damsels in their best attire,
Trip on in wanton groups, then look behind,
To spy the fools a-gazing after them. Fred.
But short will be the season of our ease,
For Basil is of flinty matter made,
And cannot be allur'd —
'Faith, Rosinberg, I would thou didst command us.
Thou art his kinsman, of a rank as noble,
Some years his elder too — How has it been
That he should be prefer'd? I see not why. Ros.
Ah! but I see it, and allow it well;
He is too much my pride to wake my envy. Fred.
Nay, Count, it is thy foolish admiration
Which raises him to such superior height;
And truly thou hast so infected us,
That I at times have felt me aw'd before him,
I knew not why. 'Tis cursed folly this.
Thou art as brave, of as good parts as he. Ros.
Our talents of a diff'rent nature are;
   Mine for the daily intercourse of life,
And his for higher things. Fred.
Well, praise him as thou wilt; I see it not;
I'm sure I am as brave a man as he. Ros.
Yes, brave thou art, but 'tis subaltern brav'ry,
And doth respect thyself. Thou'lt bleed as well,
Give and receive as deep a wound as he.
When Basil fights he wields a thousand swords;
For 'tis their trust in his unshaken mind,
O'erwatching all the changes of the field,
Calm and inventive 'midst the battle's storm,
Which makes his soldiers bold.—
There have been those, in early manhood slain,
Whose great heroic souls have yet inspir'd
With such a noble zeal their gen'rous troops,
That to their latest day of bearing arms,
Their grey-hair'd soldiers have all dangers brav'd
Of desp'rate service, claim'd with boastful pride,
As those who fought beneath them in their youth.
Such men have been; of whom it may be said,
Their spirits conquer'd when their clay was cold. Valt.
Yes, I have seen in the eventful field,
When new occasion mock'd all rules of art,
E'en old commanders hold experience cheap,
And look to Basil ere his chin was dark. Ros.
   One fault he has; I know but only one;
His too great love of military fame
Absorbs his thoughts, and makes him oft appear
Unsocial and severe. Fred.
Well, feel I not undaunted in the field?
As much enthusiastic love of glory?
Why am I not as good a man as he? Ros.
He's form'd for great occasions, thou for small. Valt.
But small occasions in the path of life
Lie thickly sown, while great are rarely scatter'd. Ros.
By which you would infer that men like Fred'ric
Should on the whole a better figure make,
Than men of higher parts. It is not so;
For some show well, and fair applauses gain,
Where want of skill in other men is graceful.
Pray do not frown, good Fred'ric, no offence:
Thou canst not make a great man of thyself;
Yet wisely deign to use thy native pow'rs,
And prove an honour'd courtly gentleman.
But hush! no more of this; here Basil comes.
 
Enter Basil , who returns their salute without speaking. Ros.
What thinkst thou, Valtomer, of Mantua's princess? Valt.
Fame prais'd her much, but hath not prais'd her more
Than on a better proof the eye consents to.
With all that grace and nobleness of mien,
She might do honour to an emp'ror's throne;
   She is too noble for a petty court.
Is it not so, my lord? —  To Basil , who only bows assent .
Nay, she demeans herself with so much grace,
Such easy state, such gay magnificence,
She should be queen of revelry and show. Fred.
She's charming as the goddess of delight. Valt.
But after her, she most attracted me
Who wore the yellow scarf and walk'd the last;
For, though Victoria is a lovely woman — Fred.
Nay, it is treason but to call her woman;
She's a divinity, and should be worshipp'd.
But on my life, since now we talk of worship,
She worshipp'd Francis with right noble gifts!
They sparkled so with gold and precious gems—
Their value must be great; some thousand crowns. Ros.
I would not rate them at a price so mean;
The cup alone, with precious stones beset,
Would fetch a sum as great. That olive-branch
The princess bore herself, of fretted gold,
Was exquisitely wrought. I mark'd it more,
Because she held it in so white a hand. Bas. in a quick voice.
Mark'd you her hand? I did not see her hand.
And yet she wav'd it twice. Ros.
It is a fair one, tho' you mark'd it not. Valt.
I wish some painter's eye had view'd the group,
   As she and all her lovely damsels pass'd;
He would have found wherewith t'enrich his art. Ros.
I wish so too; for oft their fancied beauties
Have so much cold perfection in their parts,
'Tis plain they ne'er belong'd to flesh and blood.
This is not truth, and doth not please so well
As the varieties of lib'ral nature,
Where ev'ry kind of beauty charms the eye;
Large and small featur'd, flat and prominent,
Ay, by the mass! and snub-nos'd beauties too.
'Faith, ev'ry woman hath some witching charm,
If that she be not proud, or captious. Valt.
Demure, or over-wise, or giv'n to freaks. Ros.
Or giv'n to freaks! hold, hold, good Valtomer!
Thou'lt leave no woman handsome under heav'n. Valt.
But I must leave you for an hour or so;
I mean to view the town. Fred.
I'll go with thee. Ros.
                                         And so will I.                                           Exeunt Valtomer, Frederic , and Rosinberg . Re-enter Rosinberg . Ros.
I have repented me, I will not go;
They will be too long absent. —  Pauses, and looks at Basil , who remains still musing without seeing him .
What mighty thoughts engage my pensive friend? Bas.
O it is admirable! Ros.
How runs thy fancy? what is admirable? Bas.
Her form, her face, her motion, ev'rything! Ros.
The princess; yes, have we not prais'd her much? Bas.
   I know you prais'd her, and her off'rings too!
She might have giv'n the treasures of the East,
Ere I had known it.
O! didst thou mark her when she first appear'd,
Still distant, slowly moving with her train;
Her robe and tresses floating on the wind,
Like some light figure in a morning cloud?
Then, as she onward to the eye became
The more distinct, how lovelier still she grew!
That graceful bearing of her slender form;
Her roundly spreading breast, her tow'ring neck,
Her face ting'd sweetly with the bloom of youth—
But when approaching near, she tow'rds us turn'd,
Kind mercy! what a countenance was there!
And when to our salute she gently bow'd,
Didst mark that smile rise from her parting lips?
Soft swell'd her glowing cheek, her eyes smil'd too,
O how they smil'd! 'twas like the beams of heav'n!
I felt my roused soul within me start,
Like something wak'd from sleep. Ros.
The beams of heav'n do many slumb'rers wake
To care and misery! Bas.
There's something grave and solemn in your voice.
As you pronounce these words. What dost thou mean?
Thou wouldst not sound my knell? Ros.
   No, not for all beneath the vaulted sky!
But to be plain, thus warmly from your lips,
Her praise displeases me. To men like you,
If love should come, he proves no easy guest. Bas.
What, dost thou think  am beside myself,
And cannot view the fairness of perfection
With that delight which lovely beauty gives,
Without tormenting me by fruitless wishes,
Like the poor child who sees its brighten'd face,
And whimpers for the moon! Thou art not serious.
From early youth, war has my mistress been,
And tho' a rugged one, I'll constant prove,
And not forsake her now. There may be joys
Which, to the strange o'erwhelming of the soul,
Visit the lover's breast beyond all others;
E'en now, how dearly do I feel there may!
But what of them? they are not made for me—
The hasty flashes of contending steel
Must serve instead of glances from my love,
And for soft breathing sighs the cannon's roar.
 
Ros. taking his hand.
Now am I satisfied. Forgive me, Basil. Bas.
I'm glad thou art; we'll talk of her no more;
Why should I vex my friend? Ros.
Thou hast not issued orders for the march. Bas.
I'll do it soon; thou needst not be afraid.
   To-morrow's sun shall bear us far from hence,
Never perhaps to pass these gates again. Ros.
With last night's close, did you not curse this town
That would one single day your troops retard:
And now, methinks, you talk of leaving it,
As though it were the place that gave you birth;
As though you had around these strangers' walls
Your infant gambols play'd. Bas.
The sight of what may be but little priz'd,
Doth cause a solemn sadness in the mind,
When view'd as that we ne'er shall see again. Ros.
No, not a whit to wandering men like us.
No, not a whit! What custom hath endear'd
We part with sadly, though we prize it not:
But what is new some powerful charm must own,
Thus to affect the mind. Bas. hastily.
We'll let it pass — It hath no consequence:
Thou art impatient. Ros.
I'm not impatient. 'Faith, I only wish
Some other route our destin'd march had been,
That still thou mightst thy glorious course pursue
With an untroubled mind. Bas.
O! wish it, wish it not! bless'd be that route!
What we have seen to-day, I must remember —
I should be brutish if I could forget it.
   Oft in the watchful post, or weary march,
Oft in the nightly silence of my tent,
My fixed mind shall gaze upon it still;
But it will pass before my fancy's eye,
Like some delightful vision of the soul,
To soothe, not trouble it. Ros.
What! 'midst the dangers of eventful war,
Still let thy mind be haunted by a woman?
Who would, perhaps, hear of thy fall in battle,
As Dutchmen read of earthquakes in Calabria,
And never stop to cry “alack a-day!”
For me there is but one of all the sex,
Who still shall hold her station in my breast,
'Midst all the changes of inconstant fortune;
Because I'm passing sure she loves me well,
And for my sake a sleepless pillow finds
When rumour tells bad tidings of the war;
Because I know her love will never change,
Nor make me prove uneasy jealousy. Bas.
Happy art thou! who is this wondrous woman? Ros.
It is my own good mother, faith and truth? Bas. smiling.
Give me thy hand; I love her dearly too.
Rivals we are not, though our love is one. Ros.
And yet I might be jealous of her love,
For she bestows too much of it on thee,
   Who hast no claim but to a nephew's share. Bas. going.
I'll meet thee some time hence. I must to court. Ros.
A private conference will not stay thee long.
I'll wait thy coming near the palace gate. Bas.
'Tis to the public court I mean to go. Ros.
I thought you had determin'd otherwise. Bas.
Yes, but on further thought it did appear
As though it would be failing in respect
At such a time — That look doth wrong me, Rosinberg!
For on my life, I had determin'd thus,
Ere I beheld — Before we enter'd Mantua.
But wilt thou change that soldier's dusty garb,
And go with me thyself? Ros.
                                         Yes, I will go.                                           As they are going Ros . stops and looks at Basil . Bas.
Why dost thou stop? Ros.
                                         'Tis for my wonted caution,
Which first thou gav'st me — I shall ne'er forget it!
'Twas at Vienna, on a public-day;
Thou but a youth, I then a man full form'd;
Thy stripling's brow grac'd with its first cockade,
Thy mighty bosom swell'd with mighty thoughts.
Thou'rt for the court, dear Rosinberg, quoth thou!
“Now pray thee be not caught with some gay dame,
To laugh and ogle, and befool thyself:
It is offensive in the public eye,
And suits not with a man of thy endowments.”
So said your serious lordship to me, then,
   And have on like occasions, often since,
In other terms repeated. —
But I must go to-day without my caution. Bas.
Nay, Rosinberg, I am impatient now:
Did I not say we'd talk of her no more? Ros.
Well, my good friend, God grant we keep our word!                                           Exeunt . 
 
ACT II. SCENE I. A room of state. The Duke of Mantua, Basil Rosinberg , and a number of Courtiers, Attendants , &c. The Duke and Basil appear talking together on the front of the stage. Duke.
But our opinions differ widely there;
From the position of the rival armies,
I cannot think they'll join in battle soon. Bas.
I am indeed beholden to your highness,
But though unwillingly, we must depart.
The foes are near, the time is critical;
A soldier's reputation is too fine,
To be expos'd e'en to the smallest cloud. Duke.
An untried soldier's is; but yours, my lord,
Nurs'd with the bloody show'rs of many a field,
And brightest sunshine of successful fortune,
A plant of such a hardy stem hath grown,
E'en envy's sharpest blasts assail it not.
Yet after all, by the bless'd holy Cross!
I feel too warm an interest in the cause
To stay your progress here a single hour,
Did I not know your soldiers are fatigu'd,
And two days' rest would much recruit their strenght. Bas.
Your highness will be pleas'd to pardon me;
My troops are not o'ermarch'd, and one day's rest
Is all our needs require. Duke.
                                         Ah! hadst thou come
Unfetter'd with the duties of command,
I then had well retain'd thee for my guest,
With claims too strong, too sacred for denial.
   Thy noble sire my fellow-soldier was;
Together many a rough campaign we serv'd;
I lov'd him well, and much it pleases me
A son of his beneath my roof to see. Bas.
Were I indeed free master of myself,
Strong inclination would detain me here;
No other tie were wanting.
These gracious tokens of your princely favour
I'll treasure with my best remembrances;
For he who shows them for my father's sake,
Does something sacred in his kindness bear,
As though he shed a blessing on my head. Duke.
Well, bear my greetings to the brave Pescara,
And say how warmly I embrace the cause.
Your third day's march will to his presence bring
Your valiant troops: said you not so, my lord? Enter Victoria , the Countess of Albini, Isabella , and Ladies . Bas. who changes countenance upon seeing them.
Yes, I believe — I think — I know not well—
Yes, please your grace, we march by break of day. Duke.
Nay, that I know. I ask'd you, noble count,
When you expect to join th' imperial force. Bas.
When it shall please your grace—I crave your pardon—
I somewhat have mistaken of your words. Duke.
You are not well? your colour changes, count.
What is the matter? Bas.
A dizzy mist that swims before my sight—
   A ringing in my ears—'tis strange enough—
'Tis slight — 'tis nothing worth — 'tis gone already. Duke.
I'm glad it is. Look to your friend, Count Rosinberg,
It may return again —  To Rosinberg , who stands at a little distance, looking earnestly at Basil — Duke leaves them and joins Victoria 's party . Ros.
Good heavens, Basil, is it thus with thee!
Thy hand shakes too:  taking his hand . Would we were far from hence! Bas.
I'm well again, thou needst not be afraid.
'Tis like enough my frame is indispos'd
With some slight weakness from our weary march.
Nay, look not on me thus, it is unkindly—
I cannot bear thine eyes.                                          The Duke , with Victoria and her ladies, advances to the front of the stage to Basil . Duke.
Victoria, welcome here the brave Count Basil;
His kinsman too, the gallant Rosinberg.
May you, and these fair ladies so prevail,
Such gentle suitors cannot plead in vain,
To make them grace my court another day.
I shall not be offended when I see
Your power surpasses mine. Vict.
Our feeble efforts will presumptuous seem,
Attempting that in which your highness fails. Duke.
There's honour in th' attempt; success attend ye! —  Duke retires, and mixes with the courtiers at the bottom of the stage . Vict.
I fear we incommoded you, my lord,
With the slow tedious length of our procession.
E'en as I pass'd, it went against my heart,
To stop so long upon their tedious way
   Your weary troops.— Bas.
                                            Ah! madam, all too short!
Time never bears such moments on his wing,
But when he flies too swiftly to be mark'd. Vict.
Ah! surely then you make too good amends
By marking now his after-progress well.
To-day must seem a weary length to him
Who is so eager to be gone to-morrow. Ros.
They must not linger who would quit these walls;
For if they do, a thousand masked foes;
Some under show of rich luxurious feasts,
Gay, sprightly pastime, and high-zested game;—
Nay, some, my gentle ladies, true it is,
The very worst and fellest of the crew,
 

In fair alluring shape of beauteous dames,
Do such a barrier form t' oppose their way,
As few men may o'ercome. Isab.
From this last wicked foe should we infer
Yourself have suffer'd much? Albin.
No, Isabella, these are common words,
To please you with false notions of your pow'r.
So all men talk of ladies and of love. Vict.
'Tis even so. If Love a tyrant be,
How dare his humble chained votaries
To tell such rude and wicked tales of him? Bas.
Because they most of lover's ills complain,
   Who but affect it as a courtly grace,
Whilst he who feels is silent. Ros.
But there you wrong me; I have felt it oft.
Oft has it made me sigh at ladies' feet,
Soft ditties sing, and dismal sonnets scrawl. Albin.
In all its strange effects, most worthy Rosinberg,
Has it e'er made thee in a corner sit,
Sad, lonely, moping sit, and hold thy tongue? Ros.
No, 'faith, it never has. Albin.
Ha, ha, ha, ha! then thou hast never lov'd. Ros.
Nay, but I have, and felt love's bondage too. Vict.
Fye! it is pedantry to call it bondage!
Love-marring wisdom, reason full of bars,
Deserve, methinks, that appellation more.
Is it not so, my lord? —  To Basil . Bas.
                                         O surely, madam!
That is not bondage which the soul enthrall'd
So gladly bears, and quits not but with anguish.
Stern honour's laws, the fair report of men,
These are the fetters that enchain the mind,
But such as must not, cannot be unloos'd. Vict.
No, not unloos'd, but yet one day relax'd,
To grant a lady's suit unus'd to sue. Ros.
Your highness deals severely with us now,
And proves indeed our freedom is but small,
Who are constrain'd, when such a lady sues,
   To say it cannot be. Vict.
It cannot be! Count Basil says not so. Ros.
For that I am his friend, to save him pain
I take th' ungracious office on myself. Vict.
How ill thy face is suited to thine office! Ros. smiling.
Would I could suit mine office to my face,
If that would please your highness. Vict.
No, you are obstinate and perverse all,
And would not grant it if you had the pow'r.
Albini, I'll retire; come, Isabella. Bas. aside to Ros .
Ah, Rosinberg! thou hast too far presum'd;
She is offended with us. Ros.
                                         No, she is not—
What dost thou fear? be firm, and let us go. Vict. pointing to a door leading to other apartments, by which she is ready to go out.
These are apartments strangers love to see:
Some famous paintings do their walls adorn:
They lead you also to the palace court
As quickly as the way by which you came.                                           Exit Vict . led out by Ros ., and followed by Isab . Bas. aside, looking after them.
O! what a fool am I! where fled my thoughts?
I might as well as he, now, by her side,
Have held her precious hand enclos'd in mine.
As well as he, who cares not for it neither.
O but he does! that were impossible! Albin.
You stay behind, my lord. Bas.
Your pardon, madam; honour me so far —                                           Exeunt , Basil handing out Albini . SCENE II. A gallery hung with pictures. Victoria discovered in conversation with Rosinberg, Basil, Albini , and Isabella . Vict. to Ros .
It is indeed a work of wondrous art.  To Isab .
You call'd Francisco here? Isab.
                                         He comes even now. Enter Attendant. Vict. to Ros .
He will conduct you to the northern gall'ry;
Its striking shades will call upon the eye,
To point its place there needs no other guide.                                           Exeunt Ros . and Attendant.
 To Bas . Loves not Count Basil too this charming art?
It is an ancient painting much admir'd. Bas.
Ah! do not banish me these few short moments:
Too soon they will be gone! for ever gone! Vict.
If they are precious to you, say not so,
But add to them another precious day.
A lady asks it. Bas.
Ah, madam! ask the life-blood from my heart!
Ask all but what a soldier may not give. Vict.
'Tis ever thus when favours are denied;
All had been granted but the thing we beg;
And still some great unlikely substitute,
Your life, your soul, your all of earthly good,
Is proffer'd in the room of one small boon.
So keep your life-blood, gen'rous, valiant lord,
And may it long your noble heart enrich,
Until I wish it shed.  Bas . attempts to speak .
                                         Nay, frame no new excuse;
I will not hear it.                                           She puts out her hand as if she would shut his mouth, but at a distance from it ; Bas . runs eagerly up to her, and presses it to his lips. Bas.
Let this sweet hand indeed its threat perform,
   And make it heav'n to be for ever dumb!  Vict . looks stately and offended — Basil kneels .
O pardon me! I know not what I do.
Frown not, reduce me not to wretchedness;
But only grant — Vict.
                                         What should I grant to him,
Who has so oft my earnest suit denied?
 
Vict. raising him.
Well, Basil, this good promise is thy pardon.
I will not wait your noble friend's return,
Since we shall meet again.—
You will perform your word? Bas.
I will perform it. Vict.
Farewell, my lord.                                           Exit, with her ladies. Bas. alone.
“Farewell, my lord.” O! what delightful sweetness!
The music of that voice dwells on the ear!
“Farewell, my lord!”—Ay, and then look'd she so—
The slightest glance of her bewitching eye,
Those dark blue eyes, commands the inmost soul.
Well, there is yet one day of life before me,
And, whatsoe'er betide, I will enjoy it.
Though but a partial sunshine in my lot,
I will converse with her, gaze on her still,
If all behind were pain and misery.
Pain! Were it not the easing of all pain,
E'en in the dismal gloom of after years,
Such dear remembrance on the mind to wear,
Like silv'ry moon-beams on the 'nighted deep,
   When heav'n's blest sun is gone?
Kind mercy! how my heart within me beat
When she so sweetly pled the cause of love!
Can she have lov'd? why shrink I at the thought?
Why should she not? no, no, it cannot be—
No man on earth is worthy of her love.
Ah! if she could, how blest a man were he!
Where rove my giddy thoughts? it must not be.
Yet might she well some gentle kindness bear;
Think of him oft, his absent fate inquire,
And, should he fall in battle, mourn his fall.
Yes, she would mourn — such love might she bestow;
And poor of soul the man who would exchange it
For warmest love of the most loving dame!
But here comes Rosinberg — have I done well?
He will not say I have. Enter Rosinberg . Ros.
Where is the princess?
I'm sorry I return'd not ere she went. Bas.
You'll see her still. Ros.
                                         What, comes she forth again? Bas.
She does to-morrow. Ros.
                                         Thou hast yielded then. Bas.
Come, Rosinberg, I'll tell thee as we go:
It was impossible I should not yield. Ros.
O Basil! thou art weaker than a child. Bas.
Yes, yes, my friend, but 'tis a noble weakness,
A weakness which hath greater things achiev'd
   Than all the firm determin'd strength of reason.
By heav'n! I feel a new-born pow'r within me,
Shall make me twenty-fold the man I've been
Before this fated day. Ros.
Fated indeed! but an ill-fated day,
That makes thee other than thy former self.
Yet let it work its will; it cannot change thee
To aught I shall not love. Bas.
Thanks, Rosinberg! thou art a noble heart.
I would not be the man thou couldst not love
For an imperial crown.                                           Exeunt. SCENE III. A small apartment in the palace. Enter Duke and Gauriecio . Duke.
The point is gain'd; my daughter is successful;
And Basil is detain'd another day. Gaur.
But does the princess know your secret aim? Duke.
No, that had marr'd the whole; she is a woman—
Her mind, as suits the sex, too weak and narrow
To relish deep-laid schemes of policy.
Besides, so far unlike a child of mine,
She holds its subtle arts in high derision,
And will not serve us but with bandag'd eyes.
Gauriecio, could I trusty servants find,
Experienc'd, crafty, close, and unrestrain'd
By silly superstitious child-learnt fears,
What might I not effect? Gaur.
                                         O any thing!
The deep and piercing genius of your highness,
So ably serv'd, might e'en achieve the empire. Duke.
No, no, my friend, thou dost o'erprize my parts;
Yet mighty things might be—deep subtle wits,
In truth, are master spirits in the world.
The brave man's courage, and the student's lore,
Are but as tools his secret ends to work,
Who hath the skill to use them.
This brave Count Basil, dost thou know him well?
Much have we gain'd, but for a single day,
At such a time, to hold his troops detain'd;
   When, by that secret message of our spy,
The rival pow'rs are on the brink of action:
But might we more effect? Knowst thou this Basil?
Might he be tamper'd with? Gaur.
                                         That were most dang'rous.—
He is a man, whose sense of right and wrong
To such a high romantic pitch is wound,
And all so hot and fiery in his nature,
The slightest hint, as though you did suppose
Baseness and treach'ry in him, so he'll deem it,
Would be to rouse a flame that might destroy. Duke.
But int'rest, int'rest, man's all-ruling pow'r,
Will tame the hottest spirit to your service,
And skilfully applied, mean service too;
E'en as there is an element in nature
Which, when subdu'd, will on your hearth fulfil
The lowest uses of domestic wants. Gaur.
Earth-kindled fire, which from a little spark,
 

On hidden fuel feeds its growing strength,
Till o'er the lofty fabric it aspires
And rages out its pow'r, may be subdu'd,
And in your base domestic service bound;
But who would madly in its wild career
The fire of heav'n arrest to boil his pot?
No, Basil will not serve your secret schemes,
Though you had all to give ambition strives for.
   We must beware of him. Duke.
His father was my friend, — I wish'd to gain him:
But since fantastic fancies bind him thus,
The sin be on his head; I stand acquitted,
And must deceive him, even to his ruin. Gaur.
I have prepar'd Bernardo for your service;
To-night he will depart for th' Austrain camp,
And should he find them on the eve of battle,
I've bid him wait the issue of the field.
If that our secret friends victorious prove,
With the arrow's speed he will return again:
But should fair Fortune crown Pescara's arms,
Then shall your soothing message greet his ears;
For till our friends some sound advantage gain,
Our actions still must wear an Austrian face. Duke.
Well hast thou school'd him. Didst thou add withal,
That 'tis my will he garnish well his speech,
With honied words of the most dear regard,
And friendly love I bear him? This is needful;
And lest my slowness in the promis'd aid
Awake suspicion, bid him e'en rehearse
The many favours on my house bestow'd
By his imperial master, as a theme
On which my gratitude delights to dwell. Gaur.
I have, an' please your highness. Duke.
                                         Then 'tis well. Gaur.
   But for the yielding up that little fort
There could be no suspicion. Duke.
My Governor I have severely punish'd,
As a most daring traitor to my orders.
He cannot from his darksome dungeon tell;
Why then should they suspect? Gaur.
He must not live, should Charles prove victorious. Duke.
He's done me service; say not so, Gauriecio. Gaur.
A traitor's name he will not calmly bear;
He'll tell his tale aloud — he must not live. Duke.
Well, if it must — we'll talk of this again. Gaur.
But while with anxious care and crafty wiles
You would enlarge the limits of your state,
Your highness must beware lest inward broils
Bring danger near at hand: your northern subjects
E'en now are discontented and unquiet. Duke.
What, dare the ungrateful miscreants thus return
The many favours of my princely grace?
'Tis ever thus; indulgence spoils the base;
Raising up pride, and lawless turbulence,
Like noxious vapours from the fulsome marsh
When morning shines upon it.—
Did I not lately with parental care,
When dire invaders their destruction threaten'd,
Provide them all with means of their defence?
   Did I not, as a mark of gracious trust,
A body of their vagrant youth select
To guard my sacred person? till that day
An honour never yet allow'd their race.
Did I not suffer them, upon their suit,
T' establish manufactures in their towns?
And after all some chosen soldiers spare
To guard the blessings of interior peace? Gaur.
Nay, please your highness, they do well allow,
That when your enemies, in fell revenge,
Your former inroads threaten'd to repay,
Their ancient arms you did to them restore,
With kind permission to defend themselves:
That so far have they felt your princely grace,
In drafting from their fields their goodliest youth
To be your servants: that you did vouchsafe,
On paying of a large and heavy fine,
Leave to apply the labour of their hands
As best might profit to the country's weal:
And to encourage well their infant trade,
Quarter'd your troops upon them. — Please your grace,
All this they do most readily allow. Duke.
They do allow it, then, ungrateful varlets!
What would they have? what would they have, Gauriecio? Gaur.
Some mitigation of their grievous burdens,
   Which, like an iron weight around their necks,
Do bend their care-worn faces to the earth,
Like creatures form'd upon its soil to creep,
Not stand erect and view the sun of heav'n. Duke.
But they beyond their proper sphere would rise;
Let them their lot fulfil as we do ours.
Society of various parts is form'd;
They are its grounds, its mud, its sediment,
And we the mantling top which crowns the whole.
Calm, steady labour is their greatest bliss;
To aim at higher things beseems them not.
To let them work in peace my care shall be;
To slacken labour is to nourish pride.
Methinks thou art a pleader for these fools:
What may this mean, Gauriecio? Gaur.
They were resolv'd to lay their cause before you,
And would have found some other advocate
Less pleasing to your Grace, had I refus'd Duke.
Well, let them know, some more convenient season
I'll think of this, and do for them as much
As suits the honour of my princely state.
Their prince's honour should be ever dear
To worthy subjects as their precious lives. Gaur.
I fear, unless you give some special promise,
They will be violent still — Duke.
   Then do it, if the wretches are so bold,
 

We can retract it when the times allow;
'Tis of small consequence. Go see Bernardo,
And come to me again. Gaur. solus.
O happy people! whose indulgent lord Exit.
From ev'ry care, with which increasing wealth,
With all its hopes and fears, doth ever move
The human breast, most graciously would free,
And kindly leave you nought to do but toil!
This creature now, with all his reptile cunning,
Writhing and turning through a maze of wiles,
Believes his genius form'd to rule mankind;
And call his sordid wish for territory
That noblest passion of the soul, ambition.
Born had he been to follow some low trade,
A petty tradesman still he had remain'd,
And us'd the art with which he rules a state
To circumvent his brothers of the craft,
Or cheat the buyers of his paltry ware.
And yet he thinks — ha, ha, ha, ha! — he thinks
I am the tool and servant of his will.
Well, let it be; through all the maze of trouble
His plots and base oppression must create,
I'll shape myself away to higher things:
And who will say 'tis wrong?
   A sordid being, who expects no faith
But as self-interest binds; who would not trust
The strongest ties of nature on the soul,
Deserves no faithful service. Perverse fate!
Were I like him, I would despise this dealing:
But being as I am, born low in fortune,
Yet with a mind aspiring to be great,
I must not scorn the steps which lead to it:
And if they are not right, no saint am I:
I follow nature's passion in my breast,
Which urges me to rise in spite of fortune.                                           Exit. SCENE IV. An apartment in the palace. Victoria and Isabella are discovered playing at chess; the Countess Albini sitting by them reading to herself. Vict.
Away with it, I will not play again.
May men no more be foolish in my presence
If thou art not a cheat, an arrant cheat! Isab.
To swear that I am false by such an oath,
Should prove me honest, since its forfeiture
Would bring your highness gain. Vict.
Thou'rt wrong, my Isabella, simple maid;
For in the very forfeit of this oath,
There's death to all the dearest pride of women.
May man no more be foolish in my presence! Isab.
And does your grace, hail'd by applauding crowds,
In all the graceful eloquence address'd
Of most accomplish'd, noble, courtly youths,
Prais'd in the songs of heav'n-inspired bards,
Those awkward proofs of admiration prize,
Which rustic swains their village fair ones pay? Vict.
O, love will master all the power of art!
Ay, all! and she who never has beheld
The polish'd courtier, or the tuneful sage,
Before the glances of her conquering eye
A very native simple swain become,
Has only vulgar charms.
To make the cunning artless, tame the rude,
Subdue the haughty, shake th' undaunted soul;
   Yea, put a bridle in the lion's mouth,
And lead him forth as a domestic cur,
These are the triumphs of all-powerful beauty!
Did nought but flatt'ring words and tuneful praise,
Sighs, tender glances, and obsequious service,
Attend her presence, it were nothing worth:
I'd put a white coif o'er my braided locks,
And be a plain, good, simple, fire-side dame. Alb. raising her head from her book.
And is, indeed, a plain domestic dame,
Who fills the duties of an useful state,
A being of less dignity than she,
Who vainly on her transient beauty builds,
A little poor ideal tyranny? Isab.
Ideal too! Alb.
                                         Yes, most unreal pow'r:
For she who only finds her self-esteem
In others' admiration, begs an alms;
Depends on others for her daily food,
And is the very servant of her slaves;
Though oftentimes, in a fantastic hour,
O'er men she may a childish pow'r exert,
Which not ennobles, but degrades her state. Vict.
You are severe, Albini, most severe:
Were human passions plac'd within the breast
But to be curb'd, subdu'd, pluck'd by the roots?
All heaven's gifts to some good end were giv'n. Alb.
   Yes, for a noble, for a generous end. Vict.
Am I ungen'rous then? Alb.
                                         Yes, most ungen'rous!
Who, for the pleasure of a little pow'r,
Would give most unavailing pain to those
Whose love you ne'er can recompense again.
E'en now, to-day, O! was it not ungen'rous
To fetter Basil with a foolish tie,
Against his will, perhaps against his duty? Vict.
What, dost thou think against his will, my friend? Alb.
Full sure I am against his reason's will. Vict.
Ah! but indeed thou must excuse me here;
For duller than a shelled crab were she,
Who could suspect her pow'r in such a mind,
And calmly leave it doubtful and unprov'd.
But wherefore dost thou look so gravely on me?
Ah! well I read those looks! methinks they say,
“Your mother did not so.” Alb.
Your highness reads them true, she did not so.
If foolish vanity e'er soil'd her thoughts,
She kept it low, withheld its aliment;
Not pamper'd it with ev'ry motley food,
From the fond tribute of a noble heart
To the lisp'd flattery of a cunning child.
 
Vict.
Nay, speak not thus, Albini, speak not thus
Of little blue-eyed, sweet, fair-hair'd Mirando.
   He is the orphan of a hapless pair,
A loving, beautiful, but hapless pair,
Whose story is so pleasing, and so sad,
The swains have turn'd it to a plaintive lay,
And sing it as they tend their mountain sheep.
Besides,  to Isab .  I am the guardian of his choice.
When first I saw him — dost thou not remember? Isab.
'Twas in the public garden. Vict.
                                         Even so;
Perch'd in his nurse's arms, a rustic quean,
Ill suited to the lovely charge she bore.
How stedfastly he fix'd his looks upon me,
His dark eyes shining through forgotten tears,
Then stretch'd his little arms and call'd me mother!
What could I do? I took the bantling home—
I could not tell the imp he had no mother. Alb.
Ah! there, my child, thou hast indeed no blame. Vict.
Now this is kindly said: thanks, sweet Albini!
Still call me child, and chide me as thou wilt.
O! would that I were such as thou couldst love!
Couldst dearly love, as thou didst love my mother! Alb. pressing her to her breast.
And do I not? all-perfect as she was,
I know not that she went so near my heart
As thou with all thy faults. Vict.
And sayst thou so? would I had sooner known!
I had done any thing to give thee pleasure. Alb.
   Then do so now, and put thy faults away. Vict.
No, say not faults; the freaks of thoughtless youth. Alb.
Nay, very faults they must indeed be call'd. Vict.
O! say but foibles! youthful foibles only! Alb.
Faults, faults, real faults you must confess they are. Vict.
In truth I cannot do your sense the wrong
To think so poorly of the one you love. Alb.
I must be gone: thou hast o'ercome me now:
Another time I will not yield it so.                                          Exit. Isab.
The countess is severe, she's too severe:
She once was young though now advanc'd in years. Vict.
No, I deserve it all: she is most worthy.
Unlike those faded beauties of the court,
But now the wither'd stems of former flowers
With all their blossoms shed, her nobler mind
Procures to her the privilege of man,
Ne'er to be old till nature's strength decays.
Some few years hence, if I should live so long,
I'd be Albini rather than myself. Isab.
Here comes your little fav'rite. Vict.
I am not in the humour for him now. Enter Mirando , running up to Victoria , and taking hold of her gown, whilst she takes no notice of him, as he holds up his mouth to be kissed. Isab. to Mir .
Thou seest the princess can't be troubled with thee. Mir.
O but she will! I'll scramble up her robe,
As naughty boys do when they climb for apples. Isab.
Come here, sweet child; I'll kiss thee in her stead. Mir.
   Nay, but I will not have a kiss of thee.
Would I were tall! O were I but so tall! Isab.
And how tall wouldst thou be? Mir.
                                         Thou dost not know?
Just tall enough to reach Victoria's lips. Vict. embracing him.
O! I must bend to this, thou little urchin!
Who taught thee all this wit, this childish wit?
Whom does Mirando love?                                           Embraces him again. Mir.
                                         He loves Victoria. Vict.
And wherefore loves he her? Mir.
                                         Because she's pretty. Isab.
Hast thou no little prate to-day, Mirando?
No tale to earn a sugar-plum withal? Mir.
Ay, that I have: I know who loves her grace. Vict.
Who is it, pray? thou shalt have comfits for it. Mir. looking slily at her.
It is — it is — it is the Count of Maldo. Vict.
Away, thou little chit! that tale is old,
And was not worth a sugar-plum when new. Mir.
Well then, I know who loves her highness well. Vict.
Who is it then? Isab.
                                         Who is it, naughty boy? Mir.
It is the handsome Marquis of Carlatzi. Vict.
No, no, Mirando, thou art naughty still:
Twice have I paid thee for that tale already. Mir.
Well then, indeed — I know who loves Victoria. Vict.
And who is he? Mir.
                                         It is Mirando's self. Vict.
Thou little imp! this story is not new,
But thou shalt have thy hire. Come, let us go.
Go, run before us, boy. Mir.
   Nay, but I'll show you how Count Wolvar look'd,
When he conducted Isabel from court. Vict.
How did he look? Mir.
Give me your hand: he held his body thus:                                           putting himself in a ridiculous bowing posture .
And then he whisper'd softly; then look'd so;                                           ogling with his eyes affectedly .
Then she look'd so, and smil'd to him again.                                           throwing down his eyes affectedly . Isab.
Thou art a little knave, and must be whipp'd.                                           Exeunt , Mirando leading out Victoria affectedly. ACT III. SCENE I. An open street, or square. Enter Rosinberg and Frederic , by opposite sides of the stage. Fred.
So Basil, from the pressing calls of war,
 

Another day to rest and pastime gives.
How is it now? methinks thou art not pleas'd. Ros.
It matters little if I am or not. Fred.
Now pray thee do confess thou art asham'd:
Thou, who art wisely wont to set at naught
The noble fire of individual courage,
And call calm prudence the superior virtue,
What sayst thou now, my candid Rosinberg,
When thy great captain, in a time like this,
Denies his weary troops one day of rest
Before the exertions of approaching battle,
Yet grants it to a pretty lady's suit? Ros.
Who told thee this? it was no friendly tale;
And no one else, besides a trusty friend,
Could know his motives. Then thou wrongst me too;
For I admire, as much as thou dost, Fred'ric,
The fire of valour, e'en rash heedless valour;
But not, like thee, do I depreciate
That far superior, yea that god-like talent,
Which doth direct that fire, because indeed
It is a talent nature has denied me. Fred.
Well, well, and greatly he may boast his virtue,
Who risks perhaps th' imperial army's fate,
   To please a lady's freaks— Ros.
Go, go, thou'rt prejudic'd:
A passion which I do not choose to name
Has warp'd thy judgment. Fred.
No, by heav'n, thou wrongst me!
I do, with most enthusiastic warmth,
True valour love: wherever he is found,
I love the hero too; but hate to see
The praises due to him so cheaply earn'd. Ros.
Then mayst thou now these gen'rous feelings prove.
Behold that man, whose short and grizzly hair
In clust'ring locks his dark brown face o'ershades;
Where now the scars of former sabre wounds,
In hon'rable companionship are seen
With the deep lines of age; whose piercing eye
Beneath its shading eye-brow keenly darts
Its yet unquenched beams, as tho' in age
Its youthful fire had been again renew'd,
To be the guardian of its darken'd mate.
See with what vig'rous steps his upright form
He onward bears; nay, e'en that vacant sleeve,
Which droops so sadly by his better side,
Suits not ungracefully the vet'ran's mien.
This is the man, whose glorious acts in battle,
We heard to-day related o'er our wine.
   I go to tell the gen'ral he is come:
Enjoy the gen'rous feelings of thy breast,
And make an old man happy.                                           Exit. Enter Geoffry . Fred.
Brave soldier, let me profit by the chance
That led me here; I've heard of thy exploits. Geof.
Ah! then you have but heard an ancient tale.
Which has been long forgotten. Fred.
But it is true, and should not be forgotten;
Though gen'rals, jealous of their soldiers' fame,
May dash it with neglect. Geof.
There are, perhaps, who may be so ungen'rous. Fred.
Perhaps, sayst thou? in very truth there are.
How art thou else rewarded with neglect,
Whilst many a paltry fellow in thy corps
Has been promoted? It is ever thus.
Serv'd not Mardini in your company?
He was, though honour'd with a valiant name,
To those who knew him well, a paltry soldier. Geof.
Your pardon, sir, we did esteem him much,
Although inferior to his gallant friend,
The brave Sebastian. Fred.
                                         The brave Sebastian!
He was, as I am told, a learned coxcomb,
And lov'd a goose-quill better than a sword.
What, dost thou call him brave?
Thou, who dost bear about that war-worn trunk,
   Like an old target, hack'd and rough with wounds,
Whilst, after all his mighty battles, he
Was with a smooth skin in his coffin laid,
Unblemish'd with a scar. Geof.
His duty call'd not to such desp'rate service.
For I have fought where few alive remain'd,
And none unscath'd; where but a few remain'd,
Thus marr'd and mangled;  showing his wounds  As belike you've seen,
O' summer nights, around the evening lamp,
Some wretched moths, wingless, and half consum'd,
Just feebly crawling o'er their heaps of dead.—
In Savoy, on a small, though desp'rate post,
Of full three hundred goodly chosen men,
But twelve were left, and right dear friends were we
For ever after. They are all dead now:
I'm old and lonely.—We were valiant hearts—
Fred'ric Dewalter would have stopp'd a breach
Against the devil himself. I'm lonely now! Fred.
I'm sorry for thee. Hang ungrateful chiefs!
Why wert thou not promoted? Geof.
After that battle, where my happy fate
Had led me to fulfil a glorious part,
Chaf'd with the gibing insults of a slave,
The worthless fav'rite of a great man's fav'rite,
I rashly did affront; our cautious prince,
   With narrow policy dependant made,
Dar'd not, as I am told, promote me then,
And now he is asham'd, or has forgot it. Fred.
Fye, fye upon it! let him be asham'd!
Here is a trifle for thee—  offering him money.  Geof.
                                         No, good sir,
I have enough to live as poor men do.
When I'm in want I'll thankfully receive,
Because I'm poor, but not because I'm brave.
 
Fred.
You're proud, old soldier. Geof.
No, I am not proud;
For if I were, methinks I'd be morose,
And willing to depreciate other men. Enter Rosinberg . Ros. clapping Geof . on the shoulder.
How goes it with thee now, my good fieldmarshal? Geof.
The better that I see your honour well,
And in the humour to be merry with me. Ros.
Faith, by my sword, I've rightly nam'd thee too:
What is a good field-marshal, but a man,
Whose gen'rous courage and undaunted mind,
Doth marshal others on in glory's way?
Thou art not one by princely favour dubb'd,
But one of nature's making. Geof.
You show, my lord, such pleasant courtesy,
I know not how— Ros.
                                         But see, the gen'ral comes. Enter Basil . Ros. pointing to Geoffry .
Behold the worthy vet'ran. Bas. taking him by the hand.
Brave honourable man, your worth I know,
   And greet it with a brother soldier's love. Geof. taking away his hand in confusion.
My gen'ral, this is too much, too much honour. Bas. taking his hand again.
No, valiant soldier, I must have it so. Geof.
My humble state agrees not with such honour. Bas.
Think not of it, thy state is not thyself.
Let mean souls, highly rank'd, look down on thee,
As the poor dwarf, perch'd on a pedestal,
O'erlooks the gaint: 'tis not worth a thought.
Art thou not Geoffry of the tenth brigade,
Whose warlike feats child, maid, and matron know,
And oft, cross-elbow'd, o'er his nightly bowl,
The jolly toper to his comrade tells;
Whose glorious feats of war, by cottage door,
The ancient soldier, tracing in the sand
The many movements of the varied field,
In warlike terms to list'ning swains relates;
Whose bosoms glowing at the wondrous tale,
First learn to scorn the hind's inglorious life?
Shame seize me, if I would not rather be
The man thou art, than court-created chief,
Known only by the dates of his promotion. Geof.
Ah! would I were, would I were young again,
To fight beneath your standard, noble gen'ral!
Methinks what I have done were but a jest,
Ay, but a jest to what I now should do,
   Were I again the man that I have been.
O! I could fight! Bas.
                                         And wouldst thou fight for me? Geof.
Ay, to the death! Bas.
Then come, brave man, and be my champion still:
The sight of thee will fire my soldiers' breasts.
Come, noble vet'ran, thou shalt fight for me.                                           Exit with Geoffry . Fred.
What does he mean to do? Ros.
                                         We'll know ere long. Fred.
Our gen'ral bears it with a careless face,
For one so wise. Ros.
                                         A careless face! on what? Fred.
Now, feign not ignorance, we know it all.
News which have spread in whispers from the court,
Since last night's messenger arriv'd from Milan. Ros.
As I'm an honest man, I know it not! Fred.
'Tis said the rival armies are so near,
A battle must immediately ensue. Ros.
It cannot be. Our gen'ral knows it not.
The Duke is of our side a sworn ally,
And had such messenger to Mantua come,
He would have been appriz'd upon the instant.
It cannot be; it is some idle tale. Fred.
So may it prove till we have joined them too,
Then heaven grant they may be nearer still!
For O! my soul for war and danger pants,
As doth the noble lion for his prey.
My soul delights in battle. Ros.
   Upon my simple word, I'd rather see
A score of friendly fellows shaking hands,
Than all the world in arms. Hast thou no fear? Fred.
What dost thou mean? Ros.
                                         Hast thou no fear of death? Fred.
Fear is a name for something in the mind,
But what, from inward sense, I cannot tell.
I could as little anxious march to battle,
As when a boy to childish games I ran. Ros.
Then as much virtue hast thou in thy valour
As when a child thou hadst in childish play.
The brave man is not he who feels no fear,
For that were stupid and irrational;
But he, whose noble soul its fear subdues,
And bravely dares the danger nature shrinks from.
As for your youth, whom blood and blows delight,
Away with them! there is not in the crew
One valiant spirit — Ha! what sound is this?                                           Shouting is heard without. Fred.
The soldiers shout; I'll run and learn the cause. Ros.
But tell me first, how didst thou like the vet'ran? Fred.
He is too proud; he was displeas'd with me
Because I offer'd him a little sum. Ros.
What money! O! most gen'rous noble spirit!
Noble rewarder of superior worth!
A halfpenny for Belisarius!
But hark! they shout again — here comes Valtomer.                                           Shouting heard without.
 
Enter Valtomer .
   What does this shouting mean? Valt.
O! I have seen a sight, a glorious sight!
Thou wouldst have smil'd to see it. Ros.
How smile? methinks thine eyes are wet with tears. Valt. passing the back of his hands across his eyes.
'Faith so they are; well, well, but I smil'd too.
You heard the shouting. Ros. and Fred.
                     Yes. Valt.
                                         O had you seen it!
Drawn out in goodly ranks, there stood our troops;
Here, in the graceful state of manly youth,
His dark face brighten'd with a gen'rous smile,
Which to his eyes such flashing lustre gave,
As though his soul, like an unsheathed sword,
Had through them gleam'd, our noble gen'ral stood;
And to his soldiers, with heart-moving words,
The vet'ran showing, his brave deeds rehears'd;
Who by his side stood like a storm-scath'd oak,
Beneath the shelter of some noble tree,
In the green honours of its youthful prime. Ros.
How look'd the veteran? Valt.
                                         I cannot tell thee!
At first he bore it up with cheerful looks,
As one who fain would wear his honours bravely,
And greet the soldiers with a comrade's face:
But when Count Basil, in such moving speech,
Told o'er his actions past, and bade his troops
Great deeds to emulate, his count'nance chang'd;
High-heav'd his manly breast, as it had been
   By inward strong emotion half convuls'd;
Trembled his nether lip; he shed some tears.
The gen'ral paus'd, the soldiers shouted loud;
Then hastily he brush'd the drops away,
And wav'd his hand, and clear'd his tear-chok'd voice,
As though he would some grateful answer make;
When back with double force the whelming tide
Of passion came; high o'er his hoary head
His arm he toss'd, and heedless of respect,
In Basil's bosom hid his aged face,
Sobbing aloud. From the admiring ranks
A cry arose; still louder shouts resound.
I felt a sudden tightness grasp my throat
As it would strangle me; such as I felt,
I knew it well, some twenty years ago,
When my good father shed his blessing on me:
I hate to weep, and so I came away. Ros. giving Valt . his hand.
And there, take thou my blessing for the tale.
Hark! how they shout again! 'tis nearer now.
This way they march.                                           Martial music heard. Enter Soldiers marching in order, bearing Geoffry in triumph on their shoulders. After them enter Basil : the whole preceded by a band of music. They cross over the stage, are joined by Ros . &c., and Exeunt. SCENE II.                                          Enter Gauriecio and a Gentleman, talking as they enter. Gaur.
So slight a tie as this we cannot trust,
One day her influence may detain him here,
But love a feeble agent may be found
With the ambitious. Gent.
And so you think this boyish odd conceit
Of bearing home in triumph with his troops
That aged soldier, will your purpose serve? Gaur.
Yes, I will make it serve; for though my prince
Is little scrupulous of right and wrong,
I have possess'd his mind, as though it were
A flagrant insult on his princely state
To honour thus the man he has neglected,
Which makes him relish, with a keener taste,
My purpos'd scheme. Come, let us fall to work.
With all their warm heroic feelings rous'd,
We'll spirit up his troops to mutiny,
Which must retard, perhaps undo him quite.
Thanks to his childish love, which has so well
Procur'd us time to tamper with the fools. Gent.
Ah! but those feelings he has wak'd within them
Are gen'rous feelings, and endear himself. Gaur.
It matters not, though gen'rous in their nature,
They yet may serve a most ungen'rous end;
And he who teaches men to think, though nobly,
   Doth raise within their minds a busy judge
To scan his actions. Send thine agents forth,
And sound it in their ears how much Count Basil
Affects all difficult and desp'rate service,
To raise his fortunes by some daring stroke;
Having unto the emperor pledg'd his word,
To make his troops all dreadful hazards brave:
For which intent he fills their simple minds
With idle tales of glory and renown;
Using their warm attachment to himself
For most unworthy ends.
This is the busy time; go forth, my friend;
Mix with the soldiers, now in jolly groups
Around their ev'ning cups. There, spare no cost.                                           Gives him a purse.
Observe their words, see how the poison takes,
And then return again. Gent.
                                         I will, my lord.                                           Exeunt severally. SCENE III.                                          A suite of grand apartments, with their wide doors thrown open, lighted up with lamps, and filled with company in masks. Enter several masks, and pass through the first apartment to the other rooms. Then enter Basil in the disguise of a wounded soldier. Bas. alone.
Now am I in the region of delight!
Within the blessed compass of these walls
 

She is; the gay light of those blazing lamps
Doth shine upon her, and this painted floor
Is with her footsteps press'd. E'en now, perhaps,
Amidst that motley rout she plays her part:
There will I go; she cannot be conceal'd;
For but the flowing of her graceful robe
Will soon betray the lovely form that wears it,
Though in a thousand masks. Ye homely weeds,—                                           looking at his habit .
Which half conceal, and half declare my state,
Beneath your kind disguise, O! let me prosper,
And boldly take the privilege ye give:
Follow her mazy steps, crowd by her side;
Thus, near her face my list'ning ear incline,
And feel her soft breath fan my glowing cheek;
Her fair hand seize, yea, press it closely too!
May it not be e'en so? by heav'n it shall!
This once, O! serve me well, and ever after
Ye shall be treasur'd like a monarch's robes;
Lodg'd in my chamber, near my pillow kept;
And oft with midnight lamp I'll visit ye,
And gazing wistfully, this night recall,
With all its past delights. — But yonder moves
   A slender form, dress'd in an azure robe;
It moves not like the rest — it must be she!                                           Goes hastily into another apartment, and mixes with the masks. Enter Rosinberg , fantastically dressed, with a willow upon his head, and scraps of sonnets and torn letters fluttering round his neck, pursued by a group of masks from one of the inner apartments, who hoot at him, and push him about as he enters. st Mask.
Away, thou art a saucy jeering knave,
And fain wouldst make a jest of all true love. Ros.
Nay, gentle ladies, do not buffet me:
I am a right true servant of the fair;
And as this woeful chaplet on my brow,
And these tear-blotted sonnets would denote,
A poor abandon'd lover out of place;
With any lady ready to engage,
Who will enlist me in her loving service.
Of a convenient kind my talents are,
And to all various humours may be shap'd. nd Mask.
What canst thou do? d Mask.
                                         Ay, what besides offending? Ros.
O! I can sigh so deeply, look so sad;
Pule out a piteous tale on bended knee;
Groan like a ghost; so very wretched be,
As would delight a tender lady's heart
But to behold. st Mask.
                                         Pooh, pooh, insipid fool! Ros.
But should my lady brisker mettle own,
And tire of all those gentle dear delights,
Such pretty little quarrels I'd invent—
As whether such a fair one some dear friend
Whose squirrel's tail was pinch'd, or the soft maid,
With fav'rite lap-dog of a surfeit sick,
   Have greatest cause of delicate distress:
Or whether— st Mask.
                                         Go, thou art too bad indeed—  aside .
How could he know I quarrell'd with the Count? nd Mask.
Wilt thou do nothing for thy lady's fame? Ros.
Yes, lovely shepherdess, on ev'ry tree
I'll carve her name, with true-love garlands bound:
Write madrigals upon her roseate cheeks;
Odes to her eye; 'faith, ev'ry wart and mole
That spots her snowy skin, shall have its sonnet!
I'll make love-posies for her thimble's edge,
Rather than please her not. d Mask.
But for her sake what dangers wilt thou brave? Ros.
In truth, fair nun, I stomach dangers less
Than other service, and were something loath
To storm a convent's walls for one dear glance;
But if she'll wisely manage this alone,
As maids have done, come o'er the wall herself,
And meet me fairly on the open plain,
I will engage her tender steps to aid
In all annoyance of rude briar or stone,
Or crossing rill, some half-foot wide, or so,
Which that fair lady should unaided pass,
Ye gracious pow'rs, forbid! I will defend
Against each hideous fly, whose dreadful buzz — th Mask.
Such paltry service suits thee best indeed.
   What maid of spirit would not spurn thee from her? Ros.
Yes, to recall me soon, sublime Sultana!
For I can stand the burst of female passion,
Each change of humour and affected storm,
Be scolded, frown'd upon, to exile sent,
Recall'd, caress'd, chid, and disgrac'd again;
And say what maid of spirit would forego
The bliss of one to exercise it thus?
O! I can bear ill treatment like a lamb!— th Mask beating him.
Well, bear it then, thou hast deserv'd it well. Ros.
Zounds, lady! do not give such heavy blows;
I'm not your husband, as belike you guess. th Mask.
Come, lover, I enlist thee for my swain;
Therefore, good lady, do forbear your blows,
Nor thus assume my rights. Ros.
Agreed. Wilt thou a gracious mistress prove? th Mask.
Such as thou wouldst, such as thy genius suits;
For since of universal scope it is,
All women's humour shalt thou find in me.
I'll gently soothe thee with such winning smiles—
To nothing sink thee with a scornful frown:
Teaze thee with peevish and affected freaks;
Caress thee, love thee, hate thee, break thy pate;
But still between the whiles I'll careful be,
In feigned admiration of thy parts,
   Thy shape, thy manners, or thy graceful mien,
To bind thy giddy soul with flatt'ry's charm;
For well thou knowst that flatt'ry ever is
The tickling spice, the pungent seasoning
 

Which makes this motley dish of monstrous scraps
So pleasing to the dainty lover's taste.
Thou canst not leave, though violent in extreme,
And most vexatious in her teazing moods,
Thou canst not leave the fond admiring soul,
Who did declare, when calmer reason rul'd,
Thou hadst a pretty leg. Ros.
Marry, thou hast the better of me there. th Mask.
And more! I'll pledge to thee my honest word,
That when your noble swainship shall bestow
More faithful homage on the simple maid,
Who loves you with sincerity and truth,
Than on the changeful and capricious tyrant,
Who mocking leads you like a trammell'd ass,
My studied woman's wiles I'll lay aside,
And such an one become. Ros.
Well said, brave lady, I will follow thee.                                           Follows her to the corner of the stage.
Now on my life these ears of mine I'd give,
To have but one look of that little face,
Where such a biting tongue doth hold its court
To keep the fools in awe. Nay, nay, unmask:
   I'm sure thou hast a pair of wicked eyes,
A short and saucy nose; now pri'thee do.                                           Unmasking. Alb. unmasking.
Well, hast thou guess'd me right? Ros. bowing low.
Wild freedom, chang'd to most profound respect,
Doth make an awkward booby of me now. Alb.
I've joined your frolic with a good intent,
For much I wish'd to gain your private ear.
The time is precious, and I must be short. Ros.
On me thy slightest word more pow'r will have,
Most honour'd lady, than a conn'd oration.
Thou art the only one of all thy sex,
Who wearst thy years with such a winning grace.
Thou art the more admir'd the more thou fad'st. Alb.
I thank your lordship for these courteous words;
But to my purpose — You are Basil's friend:
Be friendly to him then, and warn him well
This court to leave, nor be allur'd to stay;
For if he does, there's mischief waits him here
May prove the bane of all his future days.
Remember this, I must no longer stay.
God bless your friend and you: I love you both.                                           Exit. Ros. alone.
What may this warning mean? I had my fears.
There's something hatching that I know not of.
I've lost all spirit for this masking now.                                           Throwing away his papers and his willows.
Away, ye scraps! I have no need of you.
   I would I knew what garment Basil wears:
I watch'd him, yet he did escape my sight;
But I must search again and find him out.                                           Exit. Enter Basil much agitated, with his mask in his hand. Bas.
In vain I've sought her, follow'd every form
Where aught appear'd of dignity or grace:
I've listen'd to the tone of ev'ry voice;
I've watch'd the entrance of each female mask,
My flutt'ring heart rous'd like a startled hare,
With the imagin'd rustling of her robes,
At ev'ry dame's approach. Deceitful night,
How art thou spent! where are thy promis'd joys?
How much of thee is gone! O spiteful fate!
And yet within the compass of these walls
Somewhere she is, although to me she is not.
Some other eye doth gaze upon her form,
Some other ear doth listen to her voice;
Some happy fav'rite doth enjoy the bliss
My spiteful stars deny.
Disturber of my soul! what veil conceals thee?
What dev'lish spell is o'er this cursed hour?
O! heav'ns and earth, where art thou! Enter a mask in the dress of a female conjurer. Mask.
Methinks thou art impatient, valiant soldier:
Thy wound doth gall thee sorely; is it so? Bas.
Away, away! I cannot fool with thee. Mask.
I have some potent drugs may ease thy smart.
   Where is thy wound? is't here?                                           Pointing to the bandage on his arm. Bas.
                                            Pooh, pooh, begone!
Thou canst do nought—'tis in my head, my heart—
'Tis ev'ry where, where med'cine cannot cure. Mask.
If wounded in the heart, it is a wound
Which some ungrateful fair one hath inflicted,
And I may conjure something for thy good. Bas.
Ah! if thou couldst! what, must I fool with thee? Mask.
Thou must awhile, and be examin'd too.
What kind of woman did the wicked deed? Bas.
I cannot tell thee. In her presence still
My mind in such a wild delight hath been,
I could not pause to picture out her beauty,
Yet nought of woman e'er was form'd so fair. Mask.
Art thou a soldier, and no weapon bearst
To send her wound for wound? Bas.
Alas! she shoots from such a hopeless height,
No dart of mine hath plume to mount so far;
None but a prince may dare. Mask.
But if thou hast no hope, thou hast no love. Bas.
I love, and yet in truth I had no hope.
But that she might at least with some good will,
Some gentle pure regard, some secret kindness,
Within her dear remembrance give me place.
This was my all of hope, but it is flown:
 

For she regards me not: despises, scorns me:
   Scorns, I must say it too, a noble heart,
That would have bled for her.                                           Mask, discovering herself to be Victoria , by speaking in her true voice.
                                         O! no, she does not.                                           Exit hastily in confusion. Bas. stands for a moment riveted to the spot, then holds up both his hands in an ecstacy.
It is herself! it is her blessed self!
O! what a fool am I, that had no power
To follow her, and urge th' advantage on.
Begone, unmanly fears! I must be bold.                                           Exit after her. A dance of masks. Enter Duke and Gauriecio , unmasked. Duke.
This revelry, methinks, goes gaily on.
The hour is late, and yet your friend returns not. Gaur.
He will return ere long — nay, there he comes. Enter Gentleman. Duke.
Does all go well?  going close up to him . Gent.
                                         All as your grace could wish.
For now the poison works, and the stung soldiers
Rage o'er their cups, and, with fire-kindled eyes,
Swear vengeance on the chief who would betray them.
That Frederic too, the discontented man
Of whom your highness was so lately told,
Swallows the bait, and does his part most bravely.
Gauriecio counsell'd well to keep him blind,
Nor with a bribe attempt him. On my soul!
He is so fiery he had spurn'd us else,
And ruin'd all the plot. Duke.
Speak softly, friend — I'll hear it all in private.
A gay and careless face we now assume.                                           Duke, Gaur . and Gent . retire into the inner apartment, appearing to laugh and talk gaily to the different masks as they pass them. Re-enter Victoria , followed by Basil . Vict.
Forbear, my lord; these words offend mine ear. Bas.
Yet let me but this once, this once offend,
Nor thus with thy displeasure punish me;
   And if my words against all prudence sin,
O! hear them, as the good of heart do list
To the wild ravings of a soul distraught Vict.
If I indeed should listen to thy words,
They must not talk of love. Bas.
To be with thee, to speak, to hear thee speak,
To claim the soft attention of thine eye,
I'd be content to talk of any thing,
If it were possible to be with thee,
And think of aught but love. Vict.
I fear, my lord, you have too much presum'd
On those unguarded words, which were in truth
Utter'd at unawares, with little heed,
And urge their meaning far beyond the right. Bas.
I thought, indeed, that they were kindly meant,
As though thy gentle breast did kindly feel
Some secret pity for my hopeless pain,
And would not pierce with scorn, ungen'rous scorn,
A heart so deeply stricken. Vict.
So far thou'st read it well. Bas.
                                         Ha! have I well?
Thou dost not hate me then? Vict.
                                         My father comes;
He were displeas'd if he should see thee thus. Bas.
Thou dost not hate me then? Vict.
Away! he'll be displeas'd — I cannot say— Bas.
Well, let him come: it is thyself I fear:
   For did destruction thunder o'er my head,
By the dread pow'r of heav'n I would not stir
Till thou hadst answer'd my impatient soul!
Thou dost not hate me? Vict.
Nay, nay, let go thy hold — I cannot hate thee.                                           Breaks from him and exit. Bas. alone.
Thou canst not hate me! no, thou canst not hate me!
For I love thee so well, so passing well,
With such o'erflowing heart, so very dearly,
That it were sinful not to pay me back
Some small, some kind return. Enter Mirando , dressed like Cupid. Mir.
Bless thee, brave soldier! Bas.
What sayst thou, pretty child! what playful fair
Has deck'd thee out in this fantastic guise? Mir.
It was Victoria's self; it was the princess. Bas.
Thou art her fav'rite then? Mir
                                         They say I am:
And now, between ourselves, I'll tell thee, soldier,
I think in very truth she loves me well.
Such merry little songs she teaches me—
Sly riddles too, and when I'm laid to rest,
Ofttimes on tip-toe near my couch she steals,
And lifts the cov'ring so, to look upon me.
And oftentimes I feign as though I slept;
For then her warm lips to my cheeks she lays,
And pats me softly with her fair white hands;
And then I laugh, and through mine eye-lids peep,
   And then she tickles me, and calls me cheat;
And then we do so laugh, ha, ha, ha, ha! Bas.
What does she even so, thou happiest child?
And have those rosy cheeks been press'd so dearly?
Delicious urchin! I will kiss thee too.  Takes him eagerly up in his arms and kisses him. Mir.
No, let me down, thy kisses are so rough,
So furious rough — she doth not kiss me so. Bas.
Sweet boy, where is thy chamber? by Victoria's? Mir.
Hard by her own. Bas.
Then will I come beneath thy window soon;
 

And, if I could, some pretty song I'd sing,
To lull thee to thy rest. Mir.
O no, thou must not! 'tis a frightful place;
It is the church-yard of the neighb'ring dome.
The princess loves it for the lofty trees,
Whose spreading branches shade her chamber walls:
So do not I; for when 'tis dark o'nights,
Goblins howl there, and ghosts rise through the ground.
I hear them many a time when I'm a bed,
And hide beneath the clothes my cow'ring head.
O! is it not a frightful thing, my lord,
To sleep alone i' the dark? Bas.
Poor harmless child! thy prate is wondrous sweet. Enter a group of masks. st Mask.
What dost thou here, thou little truant boy?
Come play thy part with us. Masks place Mirando in the middle, and range themselves round him. SONG.— a glee.
   Child, with many a childish wile,
Timid look, and blushing smile,
Downy wings to steal thy way,
Gilded bow, and quiver gay,
Who in thy simple mien would trace
The tyrant of the human race?
Who is he whose flinty heart
Hath not felt the flying dart?
Who is he that from the wound
Hath not pain and pleasure found?
Who is he that hath not shed
Curse and blessing on thy head?
Ah Love! our weal, our woe, our bliss, our bane,
A restless life have they who wear thy chain!
Ah Love! our weal, our woe, our bliss, our bane,
More hapless still are they who never felt thy pain!  All the masks dance round Cupid. Then enter a band of satyrs, who frighten away Love and his votaries; and conclude the scene, dancing in a grotesque manner. ACT IV. SCENE I. The street before Basil ' s lodging. Enter Rosinberg and two Officers. Ros. speaking as he enters.
Unless we find him quickly, all is lost. st Off.
His very guards, methinks, have left their post
To join the mutiny. Ros. knocking very loud.
Holla! who's there within? confound this door!
It will not yield. O for a giant's strength!
Holla, holla, within! will no one hear? Enter a porter from the house. Ros. eagerly to the porter.
Is he return'd? is he return'd? not yet!
Thy face doth tell me so. Port.
                                         Not yet, my lord. Ros.
Then let him ne'er return!—
Tumult, disgrace, and ruin have their way!
I'll search for him no more. Port.
He hath been absent all the night, my lord. Ros.
I know he hath. nd Off.
                                         And yet 'tis possible
He may have enter'd by the secret door;
And now, perhaps, in deepest sleep entranc'd,
Is dead to ev'ry sound.                                          Ros., without speaking, rushes into the house, and the rest follow him. Enter Basil . Bas.
The blue air of the morning pinches keenly.
Beneath her window all the chilly night,
I felt it not. Ah! night has been my day;
And the pale lamp which from her chamber gleam'd,
Has to the breeze a warmer temper lent
Than the red burning east. Re-enter Rosinberg , &c. from the house. Ros.
Himself! himself! he's here! he's here! O Basil!
What fiend at such a time could lead thee forth? Bas.
   What is the matter that disturbs you thus? Ros.
Matter that would a wiser man disturb.
Treason's abroad: thy men have mutinied. Bas.
It is not so; thy wits have mutinied,
And left their sober station in thy brain. st Off.
Indeed, my lord, he speaks in sober earnest.
Some secret enemies have been employ'd
To fill your troops with strange imaginations:
As though their gen'ral would, for selfish gain,
Their gen'rous valour urge to desp'rate deeds.
All to a man, assembled on the ramparts,
Now threaten vengeance, and refuse to march. Bas.
What! think they vilely of me? threaten too!
O! most ungen'rous, most unmanly thought!
Didst thou attempt  to Ros . to reason with their folly?
Folly it is; baseness it cannot be. Ros.
Yes, truly, I did reason with a storm,
And bid it cease to rage.—
Their eyes look fire on him who questions them:
The hollow murmurs of their mutter'd wrath
 

Sound dreadful through the dark extended ranks,
Like subterraneous grumblings of an earthquake.
— The vengeful hurricane
Does not with such fantastic writhings toss
The woods' green boughs, as does convulsive rage
   Their forms with frantic gestures agitate.
Around the chief of hell such legions throng'd,
To bring back curse and discord on creation. Bas.
Nay they are men, although impassion'd ones.
I'll go to them— Ros.
                                         And we will stand by thee.
My sword is thine against ten thousand strong,
If it should come to this. Bas.
                                         No, never, never!
There is no mean: I with my soldiers must
Or their commander or their victim prove.
But are my officers all staunch and faithful? Ros.
All but that devil, Fred'ric—
He, disappointed, left his former corps,
Where he, in truth, had been too long neglected,
Thinking he should all on the sudden rise,
From Basil's well-known love of valiant men;
And now, because it still must be deferr'd,
He thinks you seek from envy to depress him,
And burns to be reveng'd. Bas.
Well, well — This grieves me too —
But let us go.                                           Exeunt. SCENE II. The ramparts of the town. The soldiers are discovered, drawn up in a disorderly manner, hollaing and speaking loudly, and clashing their arms tumultuously. st Sol.
No, comrade, no; hell gape and swallow me,
If I do budge for such most dev'lish orders! nd Sol.
Huzza! brave comrades! Who says otherwise? d Sol.
No one, huzza! confound all treach'rous leaders!                                           The soldiers huzza and clash their arms. th Sol.
Heav'n dart its fiery light'ning on his head!
We're men, we are not cattle to be slaughter'd! nd Sol.
They who do long to caper high in air,
Into a thousand bloody fragments blown,
May follow our brave gen'ral. st Sol.
                                         Curse his name!
I've fought for him till my strain'd nerves have crack'd! nd Sol.
We will command ourselves: for Milan, comrades. th Sol.
Ay, ay, for Milan, valiant hearts, huzza!                                           All the soldiers cast up their caps in the air, and huzza. nd Sol.
Yes, comrades, tempting booty waits us there,
And easy seryice: keep good hearts, my soldiers!
The gen'ral comes, good hearts! no flinching, boys!
Look bold and fiercely: we're the masters now.                                           They all clash their arms and put on a fierce threatening aspect to receive their general, who now enters, followed by Rosinberg and officers. Basil walks close along the front ranks of the soldiers, looking at them very stedfastly; then retires a few paces back, and raising his arm , speaks with a very full loud voice. Bas.
How is it, soldiers, that I see you thus,
Assembled here, unsummon'd by command?  A confused murmur is heard amongst the soldiers; some of them call out 
But we command ourselves; we wait no orders.  A confused noise of voices is heard, and one louder than the rest calls out 
Must we be butcher'd, for that we are brave?  A loud clamour and clashing of arms, then several voices call out 
Damn hidden treach'ry! we defy thy orders.
Fred'ric shall lead us now —  Other voices call out 
We'll march where'er we list, for Milan march. Bas.  waving his hand, and beckoning them to be silent, speaks with a very loud voice .
Yes, march where'er ye list; for Milan march. Sol.
   Hear him, hear him!                                           The murmur ceases — a short pause. Bas.
Yes, march where'er ye list: for Milan march:
But as banditti, not as soldiers go;
For on this spot of earth I will disband,
And take from you the rank and name of soldiers.  A great clamour amongst the ranks; some call out 
What wear we arms for?  Others call out 
                                         No, he dares not do it.  One voice very loud 
Disband us at thy peril, treach'rous Basil!                                           Several of the soldiers brandish their arms, and threaten to attack him; the officers gather round Basil , and draw their swords to defend him. Bas.
Put up your swords, my friends, it must not be.
I thank your zeal, I'll deal with them alone. Ros.
What, shall we calmly stand and see thee butcher'd? Bas. very earnestly.
Put up, my friends!  Officers still persist . What! are you rebels too?
Will no one here his gen'ral's voice obey?
I do command you to put up your swords.
Retire, and at a distance wait th' event.
Obey, or henceforth be no friends of mine.                                           Officers retire very unwillingly. Basil waves them off with his hand till they are all gone, then walks up to the front of his soldiers, who still hold themselves in a threatening posture.
Soldiers! we've fought together in the field,
And bravely fought: i' the face of horrid death,
 

At honour's call, I've led you dauntless on;
Nor do I know the man of all your bands,
That ever poorly from the trial shrunk,
Or yielded to the foe contended space.
Am I the meanest then of all my troops,
That thus ye think, with base unmanly threats,
To move me now? Put up those paltry weapons;
They edgeless are to him who fears them not:
   Rocks have been shaken from the solid base;
But what shall move a firm and dauntless mind?
Put up your swords, or dare the threaten'd deed —
Obey, or murder me. —  A confused murmur — some of the soldiers call out 
March us to Milan, and we will obey thee.  Others call out 
Ay, march us there, and be our leader still. Bas.
Nay, if I am your leader, I'll command ye;
And where I do command, there shall you go,
But not to Milan. No, nor shall you deviate
E'en half a furlong from your destin'd way,
To seize the golden booty of the East.
Think not to gain, or temporise with me;
For should I this day's mutiny survive,
Much as I've lov'd you, soldiers, ye shall find me
Still more relentless in pursuit of vengeance;
Tremendous, cruel, military vengeance.
There is no mean — a desp'rate game ye play;
Therefore, I say, obey, or murder me.
Do as ye will, but do it manfully.
He is a coward who doth threaten me:
The man who slays me, but an angry soldier;
Acting in passion, like the frantic son,
Who struck his sire and wept.  Soldiers call out 
It was thyself who sought to murder us. st Sol.
You have unto the emp'ror pledg'd your faith,
   To lead us foremost in all desp'rate service:
You have agreed to sell your soldiers' blood,
And we have shed our dearest blood for you. Bas.
Hear me, my soldiers — d Sol.
No, hear him not, he means to cozen you.
Fred'rick will do you right —                                           Endeavouring to stir up a noise and confusion amongst them. Bas.
What cursed fiend art thou, cast out from hell
To spirit up rebellion? damned villain!                                           Seizes upon d soldier, drags him out from the ranks, and wrests his arms from him; then takes a pistol from his side, and holds it to his head.
Stand there, damn'd meddling villain, and be silent;
For if thou utt'rest but a single word,
A cough or hem, to cross me in my speech,
I'll send thy cursed spirit from the earth,
To bellow with the damn'd!                                           The soldiers keep a dead silence. After a pause , Basil resumes his speech.
Listen to me, my soldiers. —
You say that I am to the emp'ror pledg'd
To lead you foremost in all desp'rate service,
For now you call it not the path of glory;
And if in this I have offended you,
I do indeed repent me of the crime.
But new from battles, where my native troops
So bravely fought, I felt me proud at heart,
And boasted of you, boasted foolishly.
I said, fair glory's palm ye would not yield
To e'er the bravest legion train'd to arms.
I swore the meanest man of all my troops
   Would never shrink before an armed host,
If honour bade him stand. My royal master
Smil'd at the ardour of my heedless words,
And promis'd when occasion claim'd our arms,
To put them to the proof.
But ye do peace, and ease, and booty love,
Safe and ignoble service — be it so—
Forgive me that I did mistake you thus,
But do not earn with savage mutiny,
Your own destruction. We'll for Pavia march,
To join the royal army near its walls,
And there with blushing forehead will I plead,
That ye are men with warlike service worn,
Requiring ease and rest. Some other chief,
Whose cold blood boils not at the trumpet's sound,
Will in your rearward station head you then,
And so, my friends, we'll part. As for myself,
A volunteer, unheeded in the ranks,
I'll rather fight, with brave men for my fellows,
Than be the leader of a sordid band.  A great murmur rises amongst the ranks, soldiers call out 
We will not part! no, no, we will not part!  All call out together 
We will not part! be thou our gen'ral still! Bas.
How can I be your gen'ral? ye obey
As caprice moves you; I must be obey'd,
As honest men against themselves perform
   A sacred oath.—
Some other chief will more indulgent prove —
You're weary grown — I've been too hard a master. Soldiers.
Thyself, and only thee, will we obey. Bas.
But if you follow me, yourselves ye pledge
Unto no easy service: — hardships, toils,
The hottest dangers of most dreadful fight
Will be your portion; and when all is o'er,
Each, like his gen'ral, must contented be
Home to return again, a poor brave soldier.
How say ye now? I spread no tempting lure—
A better fate than this, I promise none. Soldiers.
We'll follow Basil. Bas.
What token of obedience will ye give?                                           A deep pause.
Soldiers, lay down your arms!                                           They all lay down their arms.
If any here are weary of the service,
Now let them quit the ranks, and they shall have
A free discharge, and passport to their homes;
 

And from my scanty fortune I'll make good
The well-earn'd pay their royal master owes them.
Let those who follow me their arms resume,                                           They all resume their arms.
 Basil , holding up his hands . High heaven be prais'd!
I had been griev'd to part with you, my soldiers.
Here is a letter from my gracious master,
With offers of preferment in the north,
   Most high preferment, which I did refuse,
For that I would not leave my gallant troops.                                           Takes out a letter, and throws it amongst them.  A great commotion amongst the soldiers; many of them quit their ranks, and crowd about him, calling out 
Our gallant gen'ral!  Others call out 
We'll spend our hearts' blood for thee, noble Basil! Bas.
And so you thought me false? this bites to the quick!
My soldiers thought me false!                                           They all quit their ranks, and crowd eagerly around him. Basil , waving them off with his hands.
Away, away, you have disgusted me!                                           Soldiers retire to their ranks.
'Tis well — retire, and hold yourselves prepar'd
To march upon command; nor meet again
Till you are summon'd by the beat of drum.
Some secret enemy has tamper'd with you,
For yet I will not think that in these ranks
There moves a man who wears a traitor's heart.                                           The soldiers begin to march off, and music strikes up. Bas. holding up his hand.
Cease, cease, triumphant sounds;
Which our brave fathers, men without reproach,
Rais'd in the hour of triumph! but this hour
To us no glory brings —
Then silent be your march — ere that again
Our steps to glorious strains like these shall move,
A day of battle o'er our heads must pass,
And blood be shed to wash out this day's stain.                                           Exeunt soldiers, silent and dejected. Enter Frederic , who starts back on seeing Basil alone. Bas.
Advance, lieutenant; wherefore shrink you back?
I've ever seen you bear your head erect,
And front your man, though arm'd with frowning death.
Have you done aught the valiant should not do?
   I fear you have.                                           Fred . looks confused.
With secret art, and false insinuation,
The simple untaught soldiers to seduce
From their sworn duty, might become the base,
Become the coward well; but O! what villain
Had the dark pow'r t' engage thy valiant worth
In such a work as this? Fred.
Is Basil, then, so lavish of his praise
On a neglected pitiful subaltern?
It were a libel on his royal master;
A foul reproach upon fair fortune cast,
To call me valiant:
And surely he has been too much their debtor,
To mean them this rebuke. Bas.
Is nature then so sparing of her gifts,
That it is wonderful when they are found
Where fortune smiles not?
Thou art by nature brave, and so am I;
But in those distant ranks moves there not one                                           Pointing off the stage.
Of high ennobled soul, by nature form'd
A hero and commander, who will yet
In his untrophied grave forgotten lie
With meaner men? I dare be sworn there does. Fred.
What need of words? I crave of thee no favour.
I have offended, 'gainst arm'd law offended,
   And shrink not from my doom. Bas.
I know thee well, I know thou fearst not death;
On scaffold or in field with dauntless breast
Thou wilt engage him; and if thy proud soul,
In sullen obstinacy, scorns all grace,
E'en be it so. But if with manly gratitude
Thou truly canst receive a brave man's pardon,
Thou hast it freely. Fred.
It must not be. I've been thine enemy —
I've been unjust to thee — Bas.
                                         I know thou hast;
But thou art brave, and I forgive thee all. Fred.
My lord! my gen'ral! Oh, I cannot speak!
I cannot live and be the wretch I am! Bas.
But thou canst live and be an honest man
From error turn'd, — canst live and be my friend.                                           Raising Fred . from the ground.
Forbear, forbear! see where our friends advance:
They must not think thee suing for a pardon;
That would disgrace us both. Yet ere they come,
Tell me, if that thou mayst with honour tell,
What did seduce thee from thy loyal faith? Fred.
No cunning traitor did my faith attempt,
For then I had withstood him: but of late,
I know not how — a bad and restless spirit
Has work'd within my breast, and made me wretched.
I've lent mine ear to foolish idle tales,
   Of very zealous, though but recent friends. Bas.
Softly, our friends approach — of this again.                                           Exeunt. SCENE III. An apartment in Basil ' s lodgings. Enter Basil and Rosinberg . Ros.
Thank heaven I am now alone with thee.
Last night I sought thee with an anxious mind,
And curs'd thine ill-tim'd absence. —
 

There's treason in this most deceitful court,
Against thee plotting, and this morning's tumult
Hath been its damn'd effect. Bas.
                                         Nay, nay, my friend!
The nature of man's mind too well thou knowst,
To judge as vulgar hoodwink'd statesmen do;
Who, ever with their own poor wiles misled,
Believe each popular tumult or commotion
Must be the work of deep-laid policy.
Poor, mean, mechanic souls, who little know
A few short words of energetic force,
Some powerful passion on the sudden rous'd,
The animating sight of something noble,
Some fond trait of the mem'ry finely wak'd,
A sound, a simple song without design,
In revolutions, tumults, wars, rebellions,
All grand events, have oft effected more
Than deepest cunning of their paltry art.
Some drunken soldier, eloquent with wine,
Who loves not fighting, hath harangu'd his mates,
For they in truth some hardships have endur'd:
Wherefore in this should we suspect the court? Ros.
   Ah! there is something, friend, in Mantua's court,
Will make the blackest trait of barefac'd treason
Seem fair and guiltless to thy partial eye. Bas.
Nay, 'tis a weakness in thee, Rosinberg,
Which makes thy mind so jealous and distrustful.
Why should the duke be false? Ros.
Because he is a double, crafty prince —
Because I've heard it rumour'd secretly,
That he in some dark treaty is engag'd,
E'en with our master's enemy the Frank. Bas.
And so thou thinkst — Ros.
                                         Nay, hear me to the end.
Last night that good and honourable dame,
Noble Albini, with most friendly art,
From the gay clam'rous throng my steps beguil'd,
Unmask'd before me, and with earnest grace
Entreated me, if I were Basil's friend,
To tell him hidden danger waits him here,
And warn him earnestly this court to leave.
She said she lov'd thee much; and hadst thou seen
How anxiously she urg'd— Bas. interrupting him.
                                         By heav'n and earth,
There is a ray of light breaks through thy tale,
And I could leap like madmen in their freaks,
So blessed is the gleam! Ah! no, no, no!
It cannot be! alas, it cannot be!
Yet didst thou say she urg'd it earnestly?
   She is a woman, who avoids all share
In secret politics; one only charge
Her int'rest claims, Victoria's guardian friend —
And she would have me hence — it must be so.
O! would it were! how saidst thou, gentle Rosinberg?
She urg'd it earnestly — how did she urge it?
Nay, pri'thee do not stare upon me thus,
But tell me all her words. What said she else? Ros.
O Basil! I could laugh to see thy folly,
But that thy weakness doth provoke me so.
Most admirable, brave, determin'd man!
So well, so lately tried, what art thou now?
A vain deceitful thought transports thee thus.
Thinkst thou — Bas.
                                         I will not tell thee what I think. Ros.
But I can guess it well, and it deceives thee.
Leave this detested place, this fatal court,
Where dark deceitful cunning plots thy ruin.
A soldier's duty calls thee loudly hence.
The time is critical. How wilt thou feel
When they shall tell these tidings in thine ear,
That brave Pescara and his royal troops,
Our valiant fellows, have the en'my fought,
Whilst we, so near at hand, lay loit'ring here? Bas.
Thou dost disturb thy brain with fancied fears.
Our fortunes rest not on a point so nice,
   That one short day should be of all this moment;
And yet this one short day will be to me
Worth years of other time. Ros.
                                         Nay, rather say,
A day to darken all thy days beside.
Confound the fatal beauty of that woman,
Which hath bewitch'd thee so! Bas.
                                         'Tis most ungen'rous
To push me thus with rough unsparing hand,
Where but the slightest touch is felt so dearly.
It is unfriendly. Ros.
God knows my heart! I would not give thee pain;
But it disturbs me, Basil, vexes me,
To see thee so enthralled by a woman.
If she be fair, others are fair as she.
Some other face will like emotions raise,
When thou canst better play a lover's part:
But for the present, — fie upon it, Basil! Bas.
What, is it possible thou hast beheld,
Hast tarried by her too, her converse shar'd,
Yet talkst as though she were a common fair one,
Such as a man may fancy and forget?
Thou art not, sure, so dull and brutish grown:
It is not so; thou dost belie thy thoughts,
And vainly try'st to gain me with the cheat. Ros.
So thinks each lover of the maid he loves,
Yet, in their lives, some many maidens love.
   Fie on it! leave this town, and be a soldier! Bas.
Have done, have done! why dost thou bait me thus?
Thy words become disgusting to me, Rosinberg.
What claim hast thou my actions to control?
I'll Mantua leave when it is fit I should. Ros.
Then, 'faith! 'tis fitting thou shouldst leave it now;
Ay, on the instant. Is't not desperation
To stay and hazard ruin on thy fame,
Though yet uncheer'd e'en by that tempting lure,
No lover breathes without? thou hast no hope. Bas.
What, dost thou mean — curse on the paltry thought!
 

That I should count and bargain with my heart,
Upon the chances of unstinted favour,
As little souls their base-bred fancies feed?
O! were I conscious that within her breast
I held some portion of her dear regard,
Though pent for life within a prison's walls,
Where through my grate I yet might sometimes see
E'en but her shadow sporting in the sun;
Though plac'd by fate where some obstructing bound,
Some deep impassable between us roll'd,
And I might yet from some high tow'ring cliff
Perceive her distant mansion from afar,
Or mark its blue smoke rising eve and morn;
Nay, though within the circle of the moon
   Some spell did fix her, never to return,
And I might wander in the hours of night,
And upward turn my ever-gazing eye,
Fondly to mark upon its varied disk
Some little spot that might her dwelling be;
My fond, my fixed heart would still adore,
And own no other love. Away, away!
How canst thou say to one who loves like me,
Thou hast no hope? Ros.
But with such hope, my friend, how stand thy fears?
Are they so well refin'd? how wilt thou bear
Ere long to hear, that some high-favour'd prince
Has won her heart, her hand, has married her?
Though now unshackled, will it always be? Bas.
By heav'n thou dost contrive but to torment,
And hast a pleasure in the pain thou giv'st!
There is malignity in what thou sayst. Ros.
No, not malignity, but kindness, Basil,
That fain would save thee from the yawning gulf,
To which blind passion guides thy heedless steps. Bas.
Go, rather save thyself
From the weak passion which has seiz'd thy breast,
T' assume authority with sage-like brow,
And shape my actions by thine own caprice.
I can direct myself. Ros.
                                         Yes, do thyself,
   And let no artful woman do it for thee. Bas.
I scorn thy thought: it is beneath my scorn:
It is of meanness sprung — an artful woman!
O! she has all the loveliness of heav'n,
And all its goodness too! Ros.
I mean not to impute dishonest arts,
I mean not to impute — Bas.
                                         No, 'faith, thou canst not. Ros.
What, can I not? their arts all women have.
But now of this no more; it moves thee greatly.
Yet once again, as a most loving friend,
Let me conjure thee, if thou prizest honour,
A soldier's fair repute, a hero's fame,
What noble spirits love, and well I know
Full dearly dost thou prize them, leave this place,
And give thy soldiers orders for the march. Bas.
Nay, since thou must assume it o'er me thus,
Be gen'ral, and command my soldiers too. Ros.
What, hath this passion in so short a space,
O! curses on it! so far chang'd thee, Basil,
That thou dost take with such ungentle warmth,
The kindly freedom of thine ancient friend?
Methinks the beauty of a thousand maids
Would not have mov'd me thus to treat my friend,
My best, mine earliest friend! Bas.
Say kinsman rather; chance has link'd us so:
   Our blood is near, our hearts are sever'd far;
No act of choice did e'er unite our souls.
Men most unlike we are; our thoughts unlike;
My breast disowns thee — thou'rt no friend of mine. Ros.
Ah! have I then so long, so dearly lov'd thee;
So often, with an elder brother's care,
Thy childish rambles tended, shar'd thy sports;
Fill'd up by stealth thy weary school-boy's task;
Taught thy young arms thine earliest feats of strength;
With boastful pride thine early rise beheld
In glory's paths, contented then to fill
A second place, so I might serve with thee;
And sayst thou now, I am no friend of thine?
Well, be it so; I am thy kinsman then,
And by that title will I save thy name
From danger of disgrace. Indulge thy will.
I'll lay me down and feign that I am sick:
And yet I shall not feign — I shall not feign;
For thy unkindness makes me so indeed.
It will be said that Basil tarried here
To save his friend, for so they'll call me still;
Nor will dishonour fall upon thy name
For such a kindly deed.—                                           Basil walks up and down in great agitation , then stops, covers his face with his hands , and seems to be overcome. Rosinberg looks at him earnestly.
                                         O! blessed heav'n, he weeps!                                           Runs up to him, and catches him in his arms.
O Basil! I have been too hard upon thee.
And is it possible I've mov'd thee thus? Bas. in a convulsed broken voice.
   I will renounce — I'll leave — Ros.
                                            What says my Basil? Bas.
I'll Mantua leave — I'll leave this seat of bliss —
This lovely woman — tear my heart in twain —
Cast off at once my little span of joy —
Be wretched — miserable — whate'er thou wilt —
Dost thou forgive me? Ros.
                                         O my friend! my friend!
I love thee now more than I ever lov'd thee.
I must be cruel to thee to be kind:
Each pang I see thee feel strikes through my heart;
Then spare us both, call up thy noble spirit,
And meet the blow at once. Thy troops are ready —
Let us depart, nor lose another hour.
 
                                          Basil shrinks from his arms, and looks at him with somewhat of an upbraiding, at the same time a sorrowful look. Bas.
Nay, put me not to death upon the instant;
I'll see her once again, and then depart. Ros.
See her but once again, and thou art ruin'd!
It must not be — if thou regardest me — Bas.
Well then, it shall not be. Thou hast no mercy! Ros.
Ah! thou wilt bless me all thine after-life
For what now seems to thee so merciless. Bas. sitting down very dejectedly.
Mine after-life! what is mine after-life?
My day is clos'd! the gloom of night is come!
A hopeless darkness settles o'er my fate.
I've seen the last look of her heavenly eyes;
I've heard the last sounds of her blessed voice;
I've seen her fair form from my sight depart:
   My doom is clos'd! Ros. hanging over him with pity and affection.
                                            Alas! my friend! Bas.
In all her lovely grace she disappear'd,
Ah! little thought I never to return! Ros.
Why so desponding? think of warlike glory.
The fields of fair renown are still before thee;
Who would not burn such noble fame to earn? Bas.
What now are arms, or fair renown to me?
Strive for it those who will — and yet, a while,
Welcome rough war; with all thy scenes of blood;                                           Starting from his seat.
Thy roaring thunders, and thy clashing steel!
Welcome once more! what have I now to do
But play the brave man o'er again, and die? Enter Isabella . Isab. to Bas .
My princess bids me greet you, noble count — Bas. starting.
What dost thou say? Ros.
                                         Damn this untimely message! Isab.
The princess bids me greet you, noble count:
In the cool grove, hard by the southern gate,
She with her train — Bas.
                                         What, she indeed, herself? Isab.
Herself, my lord, and she requests to see you. Bas.
Thank heav'n for this! I will be there anon. Ros. taking hold of him.
Stay, stay, and do not be a madman still. Bas.
Let go thy hold: what, must I be a brute,
A very brute to please thee? no, by heav'n!                                           Breaks from him, and Exit. Ros. striking his forehead.
All lost again! ill fortune light upon her!                                           Turning eagerly to Isab .
And so thy virtuous mistress sends thee here
To make appointments, honourable dame? Isab.
   Not so, my lord, you must not call it so:
The court will hunt to-morrow, and Victoria
Would have your noble gen'ral of her train. Ros.
Confound these women, and their artful snares,
Since men will be such fools! Isab.
Yes, grumble at our empire as you will — Ros.
What, boast ye of it? empire do ye call it?
It is your shame! a short-liv'd tyranny,
That ends at last in hatred and contempt. Isab.
Nay, but some women do so wisely rule,
Their subjects never from the yoke escape. Ros.
Some women do, but they are rarely found.
There is not one in all your paltry court
Hath wit enough for the ungen'rous task.
'Faith! of you all, not one, but brave Albini,
And she disdains it — Good be with you, lady!                                           Going. Isab.
O would I could but touch that stubborn heart,
How dearly should he pay for this hour's scorn!                                           Exeunt severally. SCENE IV. A summer apartment in the country, the windows of which look to a forest. Enter Victoria in a hunting dress, followed by Albini and Isabella , speaking as they enter. Vict. to Alb .
And so you will not share our sport to-day? Alb.
My days of frolic should ere this be o'er,
But thou, my charge, hast kept me youthful still.
I should most gladly go; but, since the dawn,
A heavy sickness hangs upon my heart;
I cannot hunt to-day. Vict.
I'll stay at home and nurse thee, dear Albini. Alb.
No, no, thou shalt not stay. Vict.
                                         Nay, but I will.
I cannot follow to the cheerful horn,
Whilst thou art sick at home. Alb.
                                         Not very sick.
Rather than thou shouldst stay, my gentle child,
I'll mount my horse, and go e'en as I am. Vict.
Nay, then I'll go, and soon return again.
Meanwhile, do thou be careful of thyself. Isab.
Hark, hark! the shrill horns call us to the field:
Your highness hears it?                                           Music without , Vict.
                                         Yes, my Isabella;
I hear it, and methinks e'en at the sound
I vault already on my leathern seat,
And feel the fiery steed beneath me shake
His mantled sides, and paw the fretted earth;
Whilst I aloft, with gay equestrian grace,
The low salute of gallant lords return,
Who, waiting round with eager watchful eye,
And reined steeds, the happy moment seize.
   O! didst thou never hear, my Isabell,
How nobly Basil in the field becomes
His fiery courser's back? Isab.
                                         They say most gracefully.
 
Alb.
What, is the valiant count not yet departed? Vict.
You would not have our gallant Basil go
When I have bid him stay? not so, Albini. Alb.
Fie! reigns that spirit still so strongly in thee,
Which vainly covets all men's admiration,
And is to others cause of cruel pain?
O! would thou couldst subdue it! Vict.
My gentle friend, thou shouldst not be severe:
For now in truth I love not admiration
As I was wont to do; in truth I do not.
But yet, this once, my woman's heart excuse,
For there is something strange in this man's love,
I never met before, and I must prove it. Alb.
Well, prove it then, be stricken too thyself,
And bid sweet peace of mind a sad farewell. Vict.
O no! that rather will my peace restore:
For after this, all folly of the kind
Will quite insipid and disgusting seem;
And so I shall become a prudent maid,
And passing wise at last.                                           Music heard without.
Hark, hark! again!
All good be with you! I'll return ere long.                                           Exeunt Victoria and Isabella . Alb. sola.
   Ay, go, and ev'ry blessing with thee go,
My most tormenting and most pleasing charge!
Like vapour from the mountain stream art thou,
Which lightly rises on the morning air,
And shifts its fleeting form with ev'ry breeze,
For ever varying, and for ever graceful.
Endearing, gen'rous, bountiful and kind;
Vain, fanciful, and fond of worthless praise;
Courteous and gentle, proud and magnificent:
And yet these adverse qualities in thee,
No dissonance, nor striking contrast make;
For still thy good and amiable gifts
The sober dignity of virtue wear not,
And such a 'witching mien thy follies show,
They make a very idiot of reproof,
And smile it to disgrace.—
What shall I do with thee?—It grieves me much
To hear Count Basil is not yet departed.
When from the chace he comes, I'll watch his steps,
And speak to him myself.—
O! I could hate her for that poor ambition,
Which silly adoration only claims,
But that I well remember in my youth
I felt the like — I did not feel it long:
I tore it soon indignant from my breast,
   As that which did degrade a noble mind.                                           Exit. SCENE V. A very beautiful grove in the forest. Music and horns heard afar off, whilst huntsmen and dogs appear passing over the stage, at a great distance. Enter Victoria and Basil , as if just alighted from their horses. Vict. speaking to attendants without.
Lead on our horses to the further grove,
And wait us there.—
 To Bas . This spot so pleasing and so fragrant is,
'Twere sacrilege with horses' hoofs to wear
Its velvet turf, where little elfins dance,
And fairies sport beneath the summer's moon:
I love to tread upon it. Bas.
O! I would quit the chariot of a god
For such delightful footing! Vict.
                                         I love this spot. Bas.
It is a spot where one would live and die. Vict.
See, through the twisted boughs of those high elms,
The sun-beams on the bright'ning foliage play,
And tinge the scaled bark with ruddy brown.
Is it not beautiful? Bas.
                                         'Tis passing beautiful,
To see the sunbeams on the foliage play,                                           in a soft voice .
And tinge the scaled bark with ruddy brown. Vict.
And here I've stood full often, and admir'd
The graceful bending, o'er that shady pool,
Of you green willow, whose fair sweepy boughs
So kiss their image on the glassy plain,
And bathe their leafy tresses in the stream. Bas.
And I too love to see its drooping boughs
So kiss their image on the glassy plain,
And bathe their leafy tresses in the stream. Vict.
   My lord, it is uncivil in you thus
My very words with mock'ry to repeat. Bas.
Nay, pardon me, did I indeed repeat?
I meant it not; but when I hear thee speak,
So sweetly dwells thy voice upon mine ear,
My tongue e'en unawares assumes the tone;
As mothers on their lisping infants gaze,
And catch their broken words. I pri'thee, pardon! Vict.
But we must leave this grove: the birds fly low:
This should forebode a storm, and yet o'erhead
The sky, bespread with little downy clouds
Of purest white, would seem to promise peace.
How beautiful those pretty snowy clouds! Bas.
Of a most dazzling brightness! Vict.
Nay, nay, a veil that tempers heav'n's brightness,
Of softest, purest white. Bas.
As though an angel, in his upward flight,
Had left his mantle floating in mid air. Vict.
Still most unlike a garment; small and sever'd:                                           Turning round, and perceiving that he is gazing at her.
But thou regardst them not. Bas.
Ah! what should I regard, where should I gaze?
For in that far-shot glance, so keenly wak'd,
That sweetly rising smile of admiration,
Far better do I learn how fair heav'n is,
Than if I gaz'd upon the blue serene. Vict.
   Remember you have promis'd, gentle count,
No more to vex me with such foolish words. Bas.
Ah! wherefore should my tongue alone be mute?
 

When every look and every motion tell,
So plainly tell, and will not be forbid,
That I adore thee, love thee, worship thee!                                           Victoria looks haughty and displeased.
Ah! pardon me, I know not what I say.
Ah! frown not thus! I cannot see thee frown.
I'll do whate'er thou wilt, I will be silent:
But, O! a reined tongue, and bursting heart,
Are hard at once to bear.—Wilt thou forgive me? Vict.
We'll think no more of it; we'll quit this spot;
I do repent me that I led thee here.
But 'twas the fav'rite path of a dear friend;
Here many a time we wander'd, arm in arm;
We lov'd this grove, and now that he is absent,
I love to haunt it still.                                           Basil starts. Bas.
His fav'rite path—a friend—here arm in arm—  Clasping his hands, and raising them to his head .
Then there is such an one!  Drooping his head, and looking distractedly upon the ground .
                                         I dream'd not of it. Vict. pretending not to see him.
That little lane, with woodbine all o'ergrown,
He lov'd so well!—it is a fragrant path,
Is it not, count? Bas.
                                         It is a gloomy one! Vict.
I have, my lord, been wont to think it cheerful. Bas.
I thought your highness meant to leave this spot? Vict.
I do, and by this lane we'll take our way;
   For here he often walk'd with saunt'ring pace,
And listen'd to the woodlark's evening song. Bas.
What, must I on his very footsteps go?
Accursed be the ground on which he trode! Vict.
And is Count Basil so uncourtly grown,
That he would curse my brother to my face? Bas.
Your brother! gracious God! is it your brother?
That dear, that loving friend of whom you spoke,
Is he indeed your brother? Vict.
                                         He is, indeed, my lord. Bas.
Then heaven bless him! all good angels bless him!
I could weep o'er him now, shed blood for him!
I could—O what a foolish heart have I!                                           Walks up and down with a hurried step, tossing about his arms in transport; then stops short , and runs up to Victoria .
Is it indeed your brother? Vict.
It is indeed: what thoughts disturb'd thee so? Bas.
I will not tell thee; foolish thoughts they were.
Heav'n bless your brother! Vict.
                                         Ay, heav'n bless him too!
I have but him; would I had two brave brothers,
And thou wert one of them! Bas.
I would fly from thee to earth's utmost bounds,
Were I thy brother—
And yet, methinks, I would I had a sister. Vict.
And wherefore would ye so? Bas.
                                         To place her near thee,
The soft companion of thy hours to prove,
And, when far distant, sometimes talk of me.
Thou couldst not chide a gentle sister's cares.
   Perhaps, when rumour from the distant war,
Uncertain tales of dreadful slaughter bore,
Thou'dst see the tear hang on her pale wan cheek,
And kindly say, How does it fare with Basil? Vict.
No more of this—indeed there must no more.
A friend's remembrance I will ever bear thee.
But see where Isabella this way comes:
I had a wish to speak with her alone;
Attend us here, for soon will we return,
And then take horse again.                                           Exit. Bas. looking after her for some time.
See with what graceful steps she moves along,
Her lovely form, in ev'ry action lovely!
If but the wind her ruffled garment raise,
It twists it into some light pretty fold,
Which adds new grace. Or should some small mishap,
Some tangling branch, her fair attire derange,
What would in others strange or awkward seem,
But lends to her some wild bewitching charm.
See, yonder does she raise her lovely arm
To pluck the dangling hedge-flow'r as she goes;
And now she turns her head, as though she view'd
The distant landscape; now methinks she walks
With doubtful ling'ring steps—will she look back?
Ah, no! you thicket hides her from my sight.
Bless'd are the eyes that may behold her still,
   Nor dread that ev'ry look shall be the last!
And yet she said she would remember me.
I will believe it: Ah! I must believe it,
Or be the saddest soul that sees the light!
But, lo, a messenger, and from the army!
He brings me tidings; grant they may be good!
Till now I never fear'd what man might utter;
I dread his tale, God grant it may be good! Enter Messenger.
From the army? Mess.
                     Yes, my lord. Bas.
                                         What tidings bringst thou? Mess.
Th' imperial army, under brave Pescara,
Has beat the enemy near Pavia's walls. Bas.
Ha! have they fought? and is the battle o'er? Mess.
Yes, conquer'd; ta'en the French king prisoner,
Who, like a noble, gallant gentleman,
Fought to the last, nor yielded up his sword
Till, being one amidst surrounding foes,
His arm could do no more.
 
Bas.
What dost thou say? who is made pris'ner?
What king did fight so well? Mess.
                                         The king of France. Bas.
Thou saidst—thy words do ring so in mine ears,
I cannot catch their sense—the battle's o'er? Mess.
It is, my lord. Pescara staid your coming,
But could no longer stay. His troops were bold,
Occasion press'd him, and they bravely fought—
They bravely fought, my lord! Bas.
                                         I hear, I hear thee.
   Accurs'd am I, that it should wring my heart
To hear they bravely fought!—
They bravely fought, while we lay ling'ring here.
O! what a fated blow to strike me thus!
Perdition! shame! disgrace! a damned blow! Mess.
Ten thousand of the enemy are slain;
We too have lost full many a gallant soul.
I view'd the closing armies from afar;
Their close pik'd ranks in goodly order spread,
Which seem'd, alas! when that the fight was o'er,
Like the wild marsh's crop of stately reeds,
Laid with the passing storm. But woe is me!
When to the field I came, what dismal sights!
What waste of life! what heaps of bleeding slain! Bas.
Would I were laid a red, disfigur'd corse,
Amid those heaps! They fought, and we were absent!                                           Walks about distractedly, then stops short.
Who sent thee here? Mess.
Pescara sent me to inform Count Basil,
He needs not now his aid, and gives him leave
To march his tardy troops to distant quarters. Bas.
He says so, does he? well, it shall be so.                                           Tossing his arms distractedly.
I will to quarters, narrow quarters go,
Where voice of war shall rouse me forth no more.                                           Exit. Mess.
I'll follow after him; he is distracted:—
And yet he looks so wild, I dare not do it. Enter Victoria , as if frightened, followed by Isabella . Vict. to Isab .
   Didst thou not mark him as he pass'd thee too? Isab.
I saw him pass, but with such hasty steps I had no time. Vict.
I met him with a wild disorder'd air,
In furious haste; he stopp'd distractedly,
And gaz'd upon me with a mournful look,
But pass'd away, and spoke not. Who art thou?                                           To the messenger .
I fear thou art a bearer of bad tidings. Mess.
No, rather good, as I should deem it, madam,
Although unwelcome tidings to Count Basil.
Our army hath a glorious battle won;
Ten thousand French are slain, their monarch captive. Vict. to Mess.
Ah, there it is! he was not in the fight.
Run after him I pray—nay, do not so—
Run to his kinsman, good Count Rosinberg,
And bid him follow him—I pray thee run! Mess.
Nay, lady, by your leave, you seem not well;
I will conduct you hence, and then I'll go. Vict.
No, no, I'm well enough; I'm very well;
Go, hie thee hence, and do thine errand swiftly.                                           Exit messenger.
O what a wretch am I! I am to blame!
I only am to blame! Isab.
                                         Nay, wherefore say so?
What have you done that others would not do? Vict.
What have I done? I've fool'd a noble heart—
I've wreck'd a brave man's honour!                                           Exit, leaning upon Isabella . ACT V. SCENE I. A dark night; no moon; but a few stars glimmering ; the stage represents as much as can be discovered for the darkness a churchyard with part of a chapel, and a wing of the ducal palace adjoining to it. Enter Basil , with his hat off, his hair and his dress in disorder, stepping slowly, and stopping several times to listen, as if he was afraid of meeting any one. Bas.
No sound is here: man is at rest, and I
May near his habitations venture forth,
Like some unblessed creature of the night,
Who dares not meet his face.—Her window's dark;
No streaming light doth from her chamber beam,
That I once more may on her dwelling gaze,
And bless her still. All now is dark for me!                                           Pauses for some time, and looks upon the graves.
How happy are the dead, who quietly rest
Beneath these stones! each by his kindred laid,
Still in a hallow'd neighbourship with those,
Who when alive his social converse shar'd:
And now perhaps some dear surviving friend
Doth here at times the grateful visit pay,
Read with sad eyes his short memorial o'er,
And bless his mem'ry still!—
But I must like an outcast of my kind,
In some lone spot lay my unburied corse,
To rot above the earth; where, if perchance
The steps of human wand'rer e'er approach,
He'll stand aghast, and flee the horrid place,
With dark imaginations frightful made,—
The haunt of damned sprites. O cursed wretch!
I' the fair and honour'd field shouldst thou have died,
Where brave friends, proudly smiling through their tears,
   Had pointed out the spot where Basil lay!                                           A light seen in Victoria ' s window.
 

But, ha! the wonted, welcome light appears.
How bright within I see her chamber wall!
Athwart it too, a dark'ning shadow moves,
A slender woman's form: it is herself!
What means that motion of its clasped hands?
That drooping head? alas! is she in sorrow?
Alas! thou sweet enchantress of the mind,
Whose voice was gladness, and whose presence bliss,
Art thou unhappy too? I've brought thee woe;
It is for me thou weepst. Ah! were it so,
Fallen as I am, I yet could life endure,
In some dark den from human sight conceal'd,
So, that I sometimes from my haunt might steal,
To see and love thee still. No, no, poor wretch!
She weeps thy shame, she weeps, and scorns thee too.
She moves again; e'en darkly imag'd thus,
How lovely is that form!                                           Pauses, still looking at the window.
To be so near thee, and for ever parted!
For ever lost! what art thou now to me?
Shall the departed gaze on thee again?
Shall I glide past thee in the midnight hour,
While thou perceiv'st it not, and thinkst perhaps
'Tis but the mournful breeze that passes by?                                           Pauses again, and gazes at the window, till the light disappears.
'Tis gone, 'tis gone! these eyes have seen their last!
   The last impression of her heavenly form
The last sight of those walls wherein she lives:
The last blest ray of light from human dwelling.
I am no more a being of this world.
Farewell! farewell! all now is dark for me!
Come fated deed! come horror and despair!
Here lies my dreadful way. Enter Geoffry , from behind a tomb. Geof.
O! stay, my gen'ral! Bas.
                                         Art thou from the grave? Geof.
O, my brave gen'ral! do you know me not?
I am old Geoffry, the old maimed soldier,
You did so nobly honour. Bas.
Then go thy way, for thou art honourable;
Thou hast no shame, thou needst not seek the dark
Like fallen, fameless men. I pray thee go! Geof.
Nay, speak not thus, my noble gen'ral!
Ah! speak not thus! thou'rt brave, thou'rt honour'd still.
Thy soldier's fame is far too surely rais'd
To be o'erthrown with one unhappy chance.
I've heard of thy brave deeds with swelling heart,
And yet shall live to cast my cap in air
At glorious tales of thee.— Bas.
Forbear, forbear! thy words but wring my soul. Geof.
O! pardon me! I am old maimed Geoffry.
O! do not go! I've but one hand to hold thee.                                           Laying hold of Basil as he attempts to go away. Basil stops, and looks round upon him with softness. Bas.
Two would not hold so well, old honour'd vet'ran!
   What wouldst thou have me do? Geof.
Return, my lord; for love of blessed heaven,
Seek not such desperate ways! where would you go? Bas.
Does Geoffry ask where should a soldier go
To hide disgrace? there is no place but one.                                           Struggling to get free.
Let go thy foolish hold, and force me not
To do some violence to thy hoary head—
What, wilt thou not? nay, then it must be so.                                           Breaks violently from him, and Exit. Geof.
Curs'd feeble hand! he's gone to seek perdition!
I cannot run. Where is that stupid hind?
He should have met me here. Holla, Fernando! Enter Fernando .
We've lost him, he is gone, he's broke from me!
Did I not bid thee meet me early here,
For that he has been known to haunt this place? Fer.
And which way has he gone? Geof.
Towards the forest, if I guess aright.
But do thou run with speed to Rosinberg,
And he will follow him: run swiftly, man!                                           Exeunt. SCENE II. A wood, wild and savage; an entry to a cave, very much tangled with brushwood, is seen in the background. The time represents the dawn of morning. Basil is discovered standing near the front of the stage in a thoughtful posture, with a couple of pistols laid by him on a piece of projecting rock; he pauses for some time. Bas. alone.
What shall I be some few short moments hence?
Why ask I now? who from the dead will rise
To tell me of that awful state unknown?
But be it what it may, or bliss or torment,
Annihilation, dark and endless rest,
Or some dread thing, man's wildest range of thought
Hath never yet conceiv'd, that change I'll dare
Which makes me any thing but what I am.
I can bear scorpions' stings, tread fields of fire,
In frozen gulfs of cold eternal lie,
Be toss'd aloft through tracts of endless void,
But cannot live in shame.—  Pauses . O impious thought!
Will the great God of mercy, mercy have
On all but those who are most miserable?
Will he not punish with a pitying hand
The poor, fall'n, froward child?  Pauses. 
And shall I then against His will offend,
Because He is most good and merciful?
O! horrid baseness? what, what shall I do?
I'll think no more—it turns my dizzy brain—
 

It is too late to think—what must be, must be—
I cannot live, therefore I needs must die.                                           Takes up the pistols, and walks up and down, looking wildly around him, then discovering the cave's mouth.
Here is an entry to some darksome cave,
Where an uncoffin'd corse may rest in peace,
   And hide its foul corruption from the earth.
The threshold is unmark'd by mortal foot.
I'll do it here.  Enters the cave and Exit; a deep silence; then the report of a pistol is heard from the cave, and soon after, enter Rosinberg, Valtomer , two officers and soldiers, almost at the same moment, by different sides of the stage. Ros.
This way the sound did come. Valt.
How came ye, soldiers? heard ye that report? st Sol.
We heard it, and it seem'd to come from hence,
Which made us this way hie. Ros.
A horrid fancy darts across my mind.                                           A groan heard from the cave.
To Valt . Ha! heardst thou that? Valt.
Methinks it is the groan of one in pain.                                           A second groan. Ros.
Ha! there again! Valt.
From this cave's mouth, so dark and chok'd with weeds,
It seems to come. Ros.
                                         I'll enter first. st Off.
My lord, the way is tangled o'er with briers:
Hard by a few short paces to the left,
There is another mouth of easier access;
I pass'd it even now. Ros.
                                         Then show the way.                                           Exeunt. SCENE III. The inside of the cave. Basil discovered lying on the ground, with his head raised a little upon a few stones and earth, the pistols lying beside him, and blood upon his breast. Enter Rosinberg, Valtomer , and officers. Rosinberg , upon seeing Basil , stops short with horror, and remains motionless for some time. Valt.
Great God of heaven! what a sight is this!                                           Rosinberg runs to Basil , and stoops down by his side. Ros.
O Basil! O my friend! what hast thou done? Bas. covering his face with his hand.
Why art thou come? I thought to die in peace. Ros.
Thou knowst me not—I am thy Rosinberg,
Thy dearest, truest friend, thy loving kinsman!
Thou dost not say to me, Why art thou come? Bas.
Shame knows no kindred: I am fall'n, disgrac'd;
My fame is gone, I cannot look upon thee. Ros.
My Basil, noble spirit! talk not thus!
The greatest mind untoward fate may prove:
Thou art our gen'rous, valiant leader still,
Fall'n as thou art—and yet thou art not fall'n;
Who says thou art, must put his harness on,
And prove his words in blood. Bas.
Ah, Rosinberg! this is no time to boast!
I once had hopes a glorious name to gain;
Too proud of heart, I did too much aspire;
The hour of trial came, and found me wanting.
Talk not of me, but let me be forgotten.—
And O! my friend! something upbraids me here,                                           Laying his hand on his breast.
For that I now remember how ofttimes
I have usurp'd it o'er thy better worth,
Most vainly teaching where I should have learnt:
But thou wilt pardon me.— Ros. taking Basil's hand, and pressing it to his breast.
   Rend not my heart in twain! O! talk not thus!
I knew thou wert superior to myself,
And to all men beside: thou wert my pride;
I paid thee def'rence with a willing heart. Bas.
It was delusion, all delusion, Rosinberg!
I feel my weakness now, I own my pride.
Give me thy hand, my time is near the close:
Do this for me: thou knowst my love, Victoria— Ros.
O curse that woman! she it is alone—
She has undone us all! Bas.
It doubles unto me the stroke of death
To hear thee name her thus. O curse her not!
The fault is mine; she's gentle, good and blameless—
Thou wilt not then my dying wish fulfil? Ros.
I will! I will! what wouldst thou have me do? Bas.
See her when I am gone; be gentle with her;
And tell her that I bless'd her in my death;
E'en in my agonies I lov'd and bless'd her.
Wilt thou do this?— Ros.
                                         I'll do what thou desir'st Bas.
I thank thee, Rosinberg; my time draws near.                                           Raising his head a little, and perceiving officers.
Is there not some one here? are we alone? Ros. making a sign for the officers to retire.
'Tis but a sentry, to prevent intrusion. Bas.
Thou knowst this desp'rate deed from sacred rites
Hath shut me out: I am unbless'd of men,
And what I am in sight of th' awful God,
   I dare not think; when I am gone, my friend,
O! let a good man's prayers to heav'n ascend
For an offending spirit!—Pray for me.
What thinkest thou? although an outcast here,
May not some heavenly mercy still be found? Ros.
Thou wilt find mercy—my beloved Basil—
It cannot be that thou shouldst be rejected.
 

I will with bended knee—I will implore—
It chokes mine utterance—I will pray for thee— Bas.
This comforts me—thou art a loving friend.                                           A noise without. Ros. to off. without.
What noise is that? Enter Valtomer . Valt. to Ros .
My lord, the soldiers all insist to enter.
What shall I do? they will not be denied:
They say that they will see their noble gen'ral. Bas.
Ah, my brave fellows! do they call me so? Ros.
Then let them come.  Enter soldiers, who gather round Basil , and look mournfully upon him; he holds out his hand to them with a faint smile. Bas.
My gen'rous soldiers, this is kindly meant.
I'm low i' the dust; God bless you all, brave hearts! st Sol.
And God bless you, my noble, noble gen'ral!
We'll never follow such a leader more. nd Sol.
Ah! had you staid with us, my noble gen'ral,
We would have died for you.  d soldier endeavours next to speak, but cannot ; and kneeling down by Basil , covers his face with his cloak. Rosinberg turns his face to the wall and weeps. Bas. in a very faint broken voice.
Where art thou? do not leave me, Rosinberg—
Come near to me—these fellows make me weep:
I have no power to weep—give me thy hand—
   I love to feel thy grasp—my heart beats strangely—
It beats as though its breathings would be few—
Remember— Ros.
                                         Is there aught thou wouldst desire? Bas.
Nought but a little earth to cover me,
And lay the smooth sod even with the ground—
Let no stone mark the spot—give no offence.
I fain would say—what can I say to thee?                                           A deep pause; after a feeble struggle , Basil expires. st Sol.
That motion was his last. nd Sol.
                                         His spirit's fled. st Sol.
God grant it peace! it was a noble spirit! th Sol.
The trumpet's sound did never rouse a braver. st Sol.
Alas! no trumpet e'er shall rouse him more,
Until the dreadful blast that wakes the dead. nd Sol.
And when that sounds it will not wake a braver. d Sol.
How pleasantly he shar'd our hardest toil!
Our coarsest food the daintiest fare he made. th Sol.
Ay, many a time i' the cold damp plain has he
With cheerful count'nance cried, “Good rest, my hearts!”
Then wrapp'd him in his cloak, and laid him down
E'en like the meanest soldier in the field.  Rosinberg all this time continues hanging over the body, and gazing upon it. Valtomer now endeavours to draw him away. Valt.
This is too sad, my lord. Ros.
There, seest thou how he lies? so fix'd, so pale!
Ah! what an end is this! thus lost! thus fall'n!
To be thus taken in his middle course,
Where he so nobly strove; till cursed passion
Came like a sun-stroke on his mid-day toil,
   And cut the strong man down. O Basil! Basil! Valt.
Forbear, my friend, we must not sorrow here. Ros.
He was the younger brother of my soul. Valt.
Indeed, my lord, it is too sad a sight.
Time calls us, let the body be remov'd. Ros.
He was—O! he was like no other man! Valt. still endeavouring to draw him away.
Nay, now forbear. Ros.
                                         I lov'd him from his birth! Valt.
Time presses, let the body be remov'd. Ros.
What sayst thou? Valt.
                                         Shall we not remove him hence? Ros.
He has forbid it, and has charg'd me well
To leave his grave unknown? for that the church
All sacred rites to the self-slain denies.
He would not give offence. st Sol.
What! shall our gen'ral, like a very wretch,
Be laid unhonour'd in the common ground?
No last salute to bid his soul farewell?
No warlike honours paid? it shall not be. nd Sol.
Laid thus? no, by the blessed light of heav'n!
In the most holy spot in Mantua's walls
He shall be laid; in face of day be laid:
And though black priests should curse us in the teeth,
We will fire o'er him whilst our hands have power
To grasp a musket. Several soldiers.
Let those who dare forbid it! Ros.
My brave companions, be it as you will.                                           Spreading out his arms as if he would embrace the soldiers.—They prepare to remove the body. Valt.
   Nay, stop a while, we will not move it now,
For see a mournful visitor appears,
And must not be denied. Enter Victoria and Isabella . Vict.
I though to find him here; where has he fled?                                           Rosinberg points to the body without speaking ; Victoria shrieks out and falls into the arms of Isabella . Isab.
Alas! my gentle mistress, this will kill thee. Vict. recovering.
Unloose thy hold, and let me look upon him.
O! horrid, horrid sight! my ruin'd Basil!
 

Is this the sad reward of all thy love?
O! I have murder'd thee!                                           Kneels down by the body, and bends over it .
These wasted streams of life! this bloody wound!                                           Laying her hand upon his heart .
Is there no breathing here? all still! all cold!
Open thine eyes, speak, be thyself again,
And I will love thee, serve thee, follow thee,
In spite of all reproach. Alas! alas!
A lifeless corse art thou for ever laid,
And dost not hear my call. Ros.
No, madam; now your pity comes too late. Vict.
Dost thou upbraid me? O! I have deserv'd it! Ros.
No, madam, no, I will not now upbraid:
But woman's grief is like a summer storm,
Short as it violent is; in gayer scenes,
Where soon thou shalt in giddy circles blaze,
And play the airy goddess of the day,
Thine eye, perchance, amidst th' observing crowd,
Shall mark th' indignant face of Basil's friend,
   And then it will upbraid. Vict.
No, never, never! thus it shall not be.
To the dark, shaded cloister wilt thou go,
Where sad and lonely, through the dismal grate
Thou'lt spy my wasted form, and then upbraid me. Ros.
Forgive me, heed me not; I'm griev'd at heart;
I'm fretted, gall'd, all things are hateful to me.
If thou didst love my friend, I will forgive thee;
I must forgive thee: with his dying breath
He bade me tell thee, that his latest thoughts
Were love to thee; in death he lov'd and bless'd thee.                                           Victoria goes to throw herself upon the body , but is prevented by Valtomer and Isabella , who support her in their arms, and endeavour to draw her away from it . Vict.
Oh! force me not away! by his cold corse
Let me lie down and weep. O! Basil, Basil!
The gallant and the brave! how hast thou lov'd me!
If there is any holy kindness in you,                                           To Isab . and Valt .
Tear me not hence.
For he lov'd me in thoughtless folly lost,
With all my faults, most worthless of his love;
And him I'll love in the low bed of death,
In horror and decay.—
Near his lone tomb I'll spend my wretched days
In humble pray'r for his departed spirit:
Cold as his grave shall be my earthy bed,
As dark my cheerless cell. Force me not hence.
I will not go, for grief hath made me strong.                                           Struggling to get loose . Ros.
   Do not withhold her, leave her sorrow free.                                           They let her go, and she throws herself upon the body in an agony of grief .
It doth subdue the sternness of my grief
To see her mourn him thus.—Yet I must curse.—
Heav'n's curses light upon her damned father,
Whose crooked policy has wrought this wreck! Isab.
If he has done it, you are well reveng'd,
For all his hidden plots are now detected.
Gauriecio, for some int'rest of his own,
His master's secret dealings with the foe
Has to Lannoy betray'd; who straight hath sent,
On the behalf of his imperial lord,
A message full of dreadful threats to Mantua.
His discontented subjects aid him not;
He must submit to the degrading terms
A haughty conqu'ring power will now impose. Ros.
And art thou sure of this? Isab.
                                         I am, my lord. Ros.
Give me thy hand, I'm glad on't, O! I'm glad on't!
It should be so! how like a hateful ape,
Detected, grinning, 'midst his pilfer'd hoard,
A cunning man appears, whose secret frauds
Are open'd to the day! scorn'd, hooted, mock'd!
Scorn'd by the very fools who most admir'd
His worthless art. But when a great mind falls,
The noble nature of man's gen'rous heart
Doth bear him up against the shame of ruin;
   With gentle censure using but his faults
As modest means to introduce his praise;
For pity like a dewy twilight comes
To close th' oppressive splendour of his day,
And they who but admir'd him in his height,
His alter'd state lament, and love him fallen.                                           Exeunt. NOTES


ST MASK
ST OFF
ST SOL
D SOL
ND MASK
ND OFF
ND SOL
D MASK
D SOL
TH MASK
TH SOL
TH MASK
ALB
ALBIN
BAS
CIT
CIT. TO OFFICER
DUKE
FER
FIRST MAN
FRED
GAUR
GENT
GEOF
GEOFFRY
ISAB
MASK
MESS
MIR
OFFI
OFFICER
OLD MAN
PORT
ROS
ROS. AND FRED
SEC. CIT
SECOND MAN
SEVERAL SOLDIERS
SOL
SOLDIERS
VALT
VICT
YOUNG MAN


 Note. — My first idea when I wrote this play was to represent Basil as having seen Victoria for the first time in the procession, that I might show more perfectly the passion from its first beginning, and also its sudden power over the mind; but I was induced, from the criticism of one whose judgment I very much respect, to alter it, and represent him as having formerly seen and loved her. The first Review that took notice of this work objected to Basil's having seen her before as a defect; and, as we are all easily determined to follow our own opinion, I have, upon after-consideration, given the play in this edition  third , as far as this is concerned, exactly in its original state. Strong internal evidence of this will be discovered by any one who will take the trouble of reading attentively the second scenes of the first and second acts in the present and former editions of this book. Had Basil seen and loved Victoria before, his first speech, in which he describes her to Rosinberg as walking in the procession, would not be natural; and there are, I think, other little things besides, which will show that the circumstance of his former meeting with her is an interpolation.
The blame of this, however, I take entirely upon myself; the critic, whose opinion I have mentioned, judged of the piece entirely as an unconnected play, and knew nothing of the general plan of this work, which ought to have been communicated to him. Had it been, indeed, an unconnected play, and had I put this additional circumstance to it with proper judgment and skill, I am inclined to think it would have been an improvement.




THE ALIENATED MANOR: 
A COMEDY. 
IN FIVE ACTS. 


  


Front matter 

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

MEN. 

WOMEN. 


Charville.
Crafton.
Sir Robert Freemantle , Nephew to Crafton. 
Smitchenstault , a German Philosopher. 
Sir Level Clump , an Improver. 
Dickenson and Isaac , Domestics of Charville. 
Sancho , a Black. 
Mrs. Charville.
Mary , Sister to Charville. 
Mrs. Smoothly.
Dolly.

Scene, Charville 's House in the Country, and the Woods, &c. belonging to it, or near it. 



   


Main text 

ACT I. 

SCENE I. 

---A Wood, with a View of Charville 's House in the background, seen through the Trees. 

Enter Crafton , who immediately stops short, as if looking earnestly at something off the Stage. 


CRAFTON.
Who can it be? Ho! paper and pencil in hand; and the broad-brimmed hat, too, with its green lining;---I heard he was with them. Fit crow for such a rookery! 

Enter Sir Level Clump . 

Your servant, Sir Level Clump; I wish you good morning. 

SIR LEVEL.
Good morning, Mr. Crafton; I am delighted to see you. Do you often, in your morning rambles, trespass thus far on your neighbour's premises? 


   


CRAFTON.
I trespass not at present, I hope, being directly on my way to pay my compliments to Mr. Charville on this happy occasion. 

SIR LEVEL.
Right, Mr. Crafton; you are above any little resentment for the extravagant demand with which he so ungraciously met your late reasonable offer regarding this manor. I know all about it; and the very unfair advantage which the late Mr. Charville took of your uncle's distresses to get possession of it,---I know all about it. Mr. Charville is my friend and employer, but I am too candid not to feel and to perceive: indeed he was wrong---much in the wrong, in that matter. 

CRAFTON.
And in other matters too, perhaps. But one ? must keep up some intercourse with the world as it is; the grass would grow on my threshold, were I to confine my visits to the immaculate. You are come down, I presume, to improve the pleasure grounds. He means upon his marriage to have every thing in the modern taste. 

SIR LEVEL.
And shall have it, if I can do any thing; but he is so conceited of his own notions, so suspicious, he will trust nobody but by halves. 


   


CRAFTON.
What; not trust Sir Level Clump implicitly in matters of taste! Conceited indeed!---But what are your own ideas, Sir? Have you surveyed these woods, with all their winding paths, and ferny dells, and dark covert nooks, and tangled thickets? I am, perhaps, too partial to the ancient possessions of my forefathers, but this place seems to me full of sylvan beauty. 


SIR LEVEL tardily. 

Yes,---O yes. 

CRAFTON.
Don't you think so? 

SIR LEVEL.
Assuredly: it is at least practicable ground. If you saw my plan, you would be astonished at what may be made of it. A few hundred pounds spent in clearing away the underwood, and cutting out that heavy mass of forest trees into separate groups, would give it a very elegant, tasteful, ? parkish appearance. 

CRAFTON.
Cut out the mass of forest trees into separate groups! I should be astonished indeed. 

SIR LEVEL.
Ay, ay! knew you would. Lightness, variety, and plan---these are the grand principles; there is nothing like these. For you 

   

know very well, my dear Sir, if there be no plan, there is no meaning in what you do; ergo , no taste; and if there be no taste, it is all one as if there were no plan. 

CRAFTON.
Not exactly, Sir Level. 

SIR LEVEL.
Nay, you don't exactly comprehend me. You'll catch it by and by, when I show you my sketch. Why, these woods, as they now are, compared to what they will be when the plan is completed, are as a rude, untamed clown to a gentleman. 

CRAFTON.
Say, rather, a savage chief to a posture-master. But you have been in the North lately, Sir Level. What progress is taste making in Lochaber? 

SIR LEVEL.
O lud, lud! totally impracticable! What could I do for them there? 

CRAFTON.
I'm sure I can't pretend to say; but you did attempt something, I suppose. 


SIR LEVEL shrugging up his shoulders. 

Ay; the Laird of Glenvorluch, who is lately ? returned from Calcutta, with a large fortune at command, did indeed take me over his estate and put a carte blanche into my hands; but in vain. 

   

There was a burn as they call it running past the house, with water enough in it to have beautified the domains of a prince; but with such an impetuous, angry, perverse sprite of a stream, spade or shovel never contended. It would neither serpentine, sweep, nor expand in any direction, but as it pleased its own self. 

CRAFTON.
And having no plan, Sir Level, it would, of course, have no taste. 

SIR LEVEL.
Ah! sad discouraging work there for improvers! 

CRAFTON.
Was there nothing to be done? 

SIR LEVEL.
I could, no doubt, have collected its stores in the dell beneath, and made as fine a sheet of artificial water as heart could desire; but what purpose could this have answered with a lake fronting the house, in which you might have floated half the small craft of the British navy? 

CRAFTON.
A perverse circumstance, indeed. 

SIR LEVEL.
In short, all that I could do was to remove some rough woody knolls that intervened, and, instead of a partial view of the lake, open it 

   

entirely to the mansion, as a grand, unbroken ? whole. A hundred sturdy Highlanders, with wheelbarrows and mattocks, made it, in a short time, a very handsome, smooth, gradual slope, that would not have disgraced the finest park in Middlesex. This piece of service I did for him. 

CRAFTON.
And had you done as much for me, Sir Level, I should have acquitted you from all further trouble. 

SIR LEVEL.
Ay; you are a reasonable man, Mr. Crafton. Why, what could I have done better for such an obstinate place? 

CRAFTON.
Nothing that I know of, unless--- 

SIR LEVEL.
Unless what? Pray let me have your idea. Successful as I have generally been, I hope I still bear my faculties too meekly not to be willing to profit by a friendly hint from a person of discernment.---Unless what, my dear Sir? 

CRAFTON.
Unless you had let it alone altogether. 

SIR LEVEL.
O no, no, no! that was impossible. The Laird had a lady,---a young bride, too;---she was new, the house was new, the furniture was new, 

   

and the grounds also were to be made suitable: I was obliged to operate upon it. 

CRAFTON.
A hard necessity. 

SIR LEVEL.
However, since no better could be, they have ? my plan hanging in the library, to show what the place ought to be, if it will not; and this must even vindicate their reputation for taste to all the strangers and travellers who may visit the house of Glenvorluch. 

CRAFTON.
Very good, Sir Level; the lady must be satisfied with that.---But pray let us talk of another new-married lady. How do you like Mrs. Charville? Is she handsome? 

SIR LEVEL.
She is very fond of my plan. 

CRAFTON.
O, no doubt; and this would have been a decided answer, had I inquired after her mental perfections. But being a plain country squire, and pretending to little refinement, I simply inquire if she is handsome. 

SIR LEVEL.
I believe people do think her so, though the rules of art are against her. 


   


CRAFTON.
Never mind the rules!---I beg pardon. She is handome then; and gay, I suppose. 

SIR LEVEL.
Yes, yes: she is too gay; perhaps the world will say thoughtless; but I must still think there is a fund of good sense at bottom. She really perceived the beauties of it with great quickness, and took to it wonderfully. 

CRAFTON.
Took to what? 

SIR LEVEL.
? To my plan. 

CRAFTON.
O very true! how could I lose sight of that? And how will a gay thoughtless wife suit a man of Charville's disposition? He is very suspicious, you say. 

SIR LEVEL.
They jar a little, as other married folks sometimes do; but if they put my plan into execution, it will occupy them more pleasantly---for a time at least. 

CRAFTON.
If separating the trees will unite them, there is sense in the plan, and its taste is, of course, unquestionable.---And how do you like Charville's 

   

sister, who is so much admired---the gentle Mary? 

SIR LEVEL.
She is gentle enough; but she has no quickness, no perceptions, no brains at all. 

CRAFTON.
Poor girl; I fear she has not wit enough to comprehend the plan.---But here comes my nephew; he is going with me to the mansion. 

Enter Sir Robert Freemantle . 

Come, Freemantle; I have waited for you here some time, and am indebted to this worthy gentleman for not finding it tedious. Let me present Sir Robert Freemantle to you, Sir Level. 

FREEMANTLE.
Sir Level Clump, I presume. We shall have a paradise about us presently, were we but worthy ? to enjoy it. 

SIR LEVEL.
You do me honour, Sir Robert. You have a pretty place in the West, I am told, though the park is somewhat in disorder: but, no doubt you mean to improve it. 

FREEMANTLE.
I must improve my corn-fields in the first place, to get money for other improvements. 


   


SIR LEVEL.
The readier and more common method, now-a-days, is to cut down the wood on one part of the ground, to pay for beautifying the other. 

FREEMANTLE.
A good device, Sir Level; but my worthy mother likes the old woods as they are; and you might as well bring her own grey head to the block, as lift an axe against any veteran oak on the estate. 

SIR LEVEL.
Ah! those old people, with their prejudices, are the bane to all taste and improvement.--- Good morning; I see Mr. Smitchenstault in search of me. 

CRAFTON.
Is that the German philosopher we have heard of? 

SIR LEVEL.
Yes; so he calls himself. I only pretend to make these grounds visibly beautiful; he will demonstrate, forsooth, that they become at the same time philosophically so. Poor man! though ? mighty clever in his way, he is altogether occupied with his own notions; and to indulge him a little, I have promised to meet him in the further part of the wood. Have you a mind for a lecture? 


   


CRAFTON.
Not at present, my good Sir; excuse us. 

SIR LEVEL.
Good morning to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 


FREEMANTLE running after him. 

I have a mind for the lecture, though. 
Checking himself and returning. 
No, no; we will go to our visit: she may possibly be there; she is probably there; she is certainly there: the brightness of the sunshine, the playful fanning of the wind, the quick beating of my heart tells me so. Uncle, are you going? You are in a deep reverie, methinks. 


CRAFTON aside, without attending to him. 

His suspicions, her thoughtlessness,---the idea fastens itself upon me strangely. 

FREEMANTLE.
Ha! speaking to yourself, Sir! What is it that fastens upon you? 

CRAFTON.
A thought for your good too. 

SIR ROBERT.
Pray let me have it then, for very few such thoughts have any immediate communication with my own brain. 


   


CRAFTON.
Charville has got a pretty wife, whom he loves to a folly. 

FREEMANTLE.
? And a pretty sister, too, whom he loves but moderately; yet some other good person might be found, who would be willing to make up that deficiency. 

CRAFTON.
I understand thee well enough. But she has no fortune unless she marry with her brother's consent; and his robbing I must call it so thy poor simple cousin at the gaming-table shows plainly how much he loves money. 

FREEMANTLE.
Nay, nay! Since I have seen the sister, I would forget that unhappy transaction entirely. 

CRAFTON.
I only mention it now to show his disposition; and surely thou art poor enough to justify his refusal of thy suit to his sister. 

FREEMANTLE.
I have never made any suit to her. 

CRAFTON.
I know thou hast not; but if thou shouldst, how wouldst thou relish a flat denial from his formal importance? Therefore, if thou hast any thing of this kind in thy head, I would counsel 

   

thee to begin with paying thy particular attentions to his wife, who will afterwards plead thy cause with her husband.---Come, come; it is a very good thought; let us speak of it as we go. 

FREEMANTLE.
But not so loud; we may be overheard. 

CRAFTON.
Very true; give me thine arm. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 

SCENE II. 

Charville 's House; a Saloon opening into the Garden. 

Enter Mr. and Mrs. Charville , speaking as they enter. 


MRS. CHARVILLE.
No, no! I can't wear them so of a morning, my dear Charles: positively you sha'n't make such a witch of me. 
Pushing him gently away as he endeavours to stick flowers amongst her hair. 

CHARVILLE.
And art thou not a witch, little Harry? with spells enough about thee for any man's perdition, if thou wert not at the same time a good---a very good little witch, mine own little Harry! Do wear them so; they look pretty. 


   


MRS. CHARVILLE.
They look awkward, and affected, and silly; I can't endure them. Why will you be so teasing? 

CHARVILLE.
And are my expressions of attachment become teasing? A cold indifferent husband, then, would please you better. You reject the simple offering of a devoted heart: as my fondness increases, yours, alas! declines. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Come, come; don't look so grave! I'll stick those foolish roses into my hair, if you will, though I am sure they are only fit for a holiday nosegay. 

CHARVILLE.
I gathered them, Love. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
And I am sorry, Love, you had not the wit to gather better. They are such as a village school-mistress would strew in her drawer to sweeten her kerchiefs and aprons. They are too full blown for the flower-pot on her window. But ? never mind; I'll wear them. 

CHARVILLE.
I knew you would, for all your saucy words, mine own little Harry: and I'll tell thee what I'll do in return for all thy sweet condescension. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
And what may that be, I wonder? 


   


CHARVILLE.
You objected to my going to Middlemoor this morning. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
No, I did not. 

CHARVILLE.
Nay, but you did. I read it in your eyes, gentle Harry. But now I set that journey aside: I will not leave thee a week; not half a week; no, not a day. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
O what a tide of goodness flows upon me now! I shall be drowned therewith.---Not a day! Do you think I wish to have you always by my side? No, my dear Charles: go from home when you please; and when you return you will bring your sister and me all the news, and let us know how the world is moving. All the married folks, I know, are sometimes separated. 

CHARVILLE.
And are they as happy as you would wish to be? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
They are happy enough, I suppose. 

CHARVILLE.
I suppose; suppose . The cold, formal, miserable word! I hate the very sound of it.---I may ? go from home, then, as often as I please. My 

   

absence, I suppose , would be no interruption to your happiness? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Your occasional absence, perhaps, might increase it. The most wretched pair of all my acquaintance is the only one always together. 

CHARVILLE.
Who are they, pray? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Lady Bloom and her jealous husband. The odious man! She can't stir, but he moves too, like her shadow. She can't whisper to a friend, nor examine a picture or gem with an old cognoscenti, but he must thrust his nose between them.---But how is it now? You are as grave as a judge, and twisting off the heads of those very flowers, too, that have occasioned all this commotion. How is it with you now? 

CHARVILLE.
You take part against the husband very eagerly, I perceive. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Not very eagerly; but I hate a man who is so selfish that he must engross his wife's attention entirely. What do you think of the matter? 

CHARVILLE.
It is indifferent to you what I think of it; I am no longer your care---your only care. 


   


MRS. CHARVILLE.
Did I ever tell you that you were? God forbid I should be so uncharitable, so narrow, so confined! ? I have cared for some people in the world besides you, and I have told you so. 

CHARVILLE.
Yes, Madam; I should have remembered how long Henry Devonford disputed with me the prize of your heart: you favoured us both. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
True, Charles; but where would have been the merit of preferring you, had I cared for nobody else? If I did show some favour to him, it was you whom I married. 

CHARVILLE.
Very true, very true! It was me whom you married, married,---married. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Nay, foolish man! If you will stride about the room so, let us give something of a figure to it. We are too grave for a rigadoon, so we had better make it a minuet. 
Holding out her gown, and always facing him, as he turns away, with so much coaxing good humour, that he is at last overcome, and clasps her in his arms. 

CHARVILLE.
My dear, dear Harriet! you treat me like a fool, but I must bear with it. I know thou lovest me better than thou professest to do. 


   


MRS. CHARVILLE.
O not a whit! 

CHARVILLE.
Nay, but thou dost. I know it. 
Putting his hand fondly on hers. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Indeed you know a great deal that nobody else does. You study deeply for it; you are fond of occult learning. 

Enter a Servant announcing Company. 


CHARVILLE.
And we must be pestered with such interruptions. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Don't fret; I like to see new faces. 

Enter Crafton and Sir R. Freemantle . 


CRAFTON.
? I am happy, Mr. Charville, to offer you my hearty congratulations, and to have the honour of paying my respects to this lady. 

CHARVILLE.
I thank you, Sir. I am happy to have the honour of seeing you and Sir Robert Freemantle in my house;---and Mrs. Charville too---we are both glad to have that honour. 


   



MRS. CHARVILLE after making a formal courtesy to Crafton , and then turning to Freemantle . 

And must I do my ceremonies to you too? 
Makes a very affected stiff courtesy, and then holding out her hand to him with great vivacity. 
My old friend and playfellow, I am delighted to see you. So unexpected! Do you belong to these parts? 

FREEMANTLE.
No; but my good fortune makes me a temporary resident at present. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
It is good fortune to us all. Is it not Charles? He is brother to my friend Charlotte. 
 Charville bows gravely. 
And how does dear Charlotte? is she near us too? 

FREEMANTLE.
No; she is in Shropshire. 

CRAFTON.
I could not prevail upon my niece to come to me at this time. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
O but she will come, when she knows that I am here: do write to her: it is so long since we met. Do tell me about her, Sir Robert; I have many things to ask. 
Drawing him aside. 


   



CRAFTON to CHARVILLE . 

? What a charming frank disposition!---a most charming woman! You are a happy man, Charville, and a bold one too, after the dealings you have had with this wicked world, to become responsible for such a treasure. But you will tell me she is all perfection, and I will believe it. 

CHARVILLE.
Nay, good Sir, if you are disposed to think well of my choice, I had better trust to that for doing her justice. 

CRAFTON.
Ay, ay; I understand this grave restraint: you have applied the point of ridicule to many a poor Benedict; and when it comes to your own turn, you shrink from it. You are but a new recruit in this service of matrimony, and still belong to the awkward division. 


CHARVILLE smiling faintly. 

Perhaps so. It is a pleasant morning: did you come by--- 
Here Mrs. Charville and Freemantle pass from the bottom of the Stage into the garden. 
---by the common? 

CRAFTON.
Why, that lies miles off on the other side, you know. 

CHARVILLE.
True; I mean the garden. 


   


CRAFTON.
When you are kind enough to give me a key to it, I may come that way. 

CHARVILLE.
No, no! I mean the woods. 

CRAFTON.
You have named my way---my favourite way, ? at last. But I fear it will not long be so; for Sir Level Clump pronounces it to be practicable ground, and that is a death-warrant to nature and simplicity. 

CHARVILLE.
Nature and simplicity are very antiquated personages; and Mr. Crafton is particularly kind in taking any interest in the latter, who has assuredly no kindred claim to his protection. 

CRAFTON.
And is it for the same reason that you would drive her from yours?---But let us both befriend her on more liberal principles: I shall be proud at all times to follow your good example. 

CHARVILLE.
You expect to keep up with me on some of the easy-pacing virtues. 

CRAFTON.
I don't know; even so mounted, you may run me harder than I like. But I may strive to do it, were it only out of spite. 


   


CHARVILLE.
I'll trust you for that. 

CRAFTON.
Do so, by all means: trust me or any body for any thing, if you can, and you will cultivate a disposition of mind that is good for man in every condition, particularly in the married state. Under another name, you know, it is one of the cardinal virtues. 

Enter Smitchenstault . 


SMITCHENSTAULT.
O you talk of de vertues cardinalls, de great, ? de grand, de sublime vertues; dat be de ting, de one only ting. 

CRAFTON.
Mr. Smitchenstault, I presume. 
Bowing. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Yes, yes; hear you me: my name is Smitchenstault. Hear you me. De sublime vertue is de grand, de only vertue. I prove you dis. ---Now we shall say, here is de good-tempered man; he not quarel, he not fret, he disturb no body. Very well; let him live de next door to me: but what all dat mean?---O, dat he is de good-tempered man. Den dere is de industrious man, hear you me, de industrious man; he don't love idle, he work, he toil, he do every ting dat be to do;---very well, all dat very well: 

   

let him build my house, let him make my shoe, let him--- 


Charville who has been all this while watching with his eyes Mrs. Charville and Sir R. Freemantle , as they walked to and fro in the garden, seeing him now take a letter from his pocket, calls out, off his guard. 

A letter! 
Moves towards the garden. 


SMITCHENSTAULT pulling him back. 

Letter! I say no letter: I say make my shoe. O, let him make---let him do all dat; dis be well too. And dere be de sober man: he not love wine; wine make him ill; and he have always de great commendations,---O, he be de sober man! But, I say, now hear you me--- 

CRAFTON.
We do, Mr. Smitchenstault; and no disparagement to your argument, it is a virtue of necessity. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
? No, he don't hear.--- 
To Charville . 
What you always look dere for? 
Turning round himself. 
O, de lady is in de garden! 

CHARVILLE.
Shall we join her, Mr. Smitchenstault? She is fond of your reasoning. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
No, no! She love de flowers and frivolities. 

   

I say, hear you me. I say, let him make my shoe. 

CRAFTON.
But you had got beyond that, my good Sir. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O, very well den, you understand.---But of what value is all that piggling, niggling,---you call little thing piggling, niggling? 

CRAFTON.
Sometimes we do, perhaps. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Very well: what is it, I say, but de piggling, niggling driblets of virtue? But de grand, de sublime, is in what you call---not de heart --- 
Striking his breast. 
---not de heart. 

CRAFTON.
Stomach? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
No, no!---Soul--- 
Striking his breast with greater energy. 
---ay, de soul, dere be de sublime vertue. My sentiment, my entusiasm, my love for my friend do flame here; what tough in my rage I do cut his troat? 

CRAFTON.
That were but a trifle. But suffer me to transpose the matter, and make the sublimity of ? sentiment to belong to your friend, and the throat to yourself. 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
Pardon, pardon! you do turn upon me de very vulgar reply. Observe well de turn of my argument. Actions be noting: it is de high soaring of de soul.--- 
To Charville . 
But you don't attend; you don't look at me. 

CRAFTON.
Pardon him, Sir; his eyes follow a still more agreeable object.---Shall we join the party in the garden, Charville? 

CHARVILLE.
O no! 'pon my soul, I was looking at that window frame; the ideot of a carpenter has bungled it abominably. 

CRAFTON.
I see no fault in it. But you are difficult; Mr. Smitchenstault's piggling virtues are not in favour this morning. Good day. 

CHARVILLE.
Ha, ha, ha! 'Pon my life, I am in the best humour imaginable. You will not go without taking leave of Mrs. Charville. 

CRAFTON.
I am a person of no ceremony. 

CHARVILLE.
But your nephew. 

CRAFTON.
He will walk home when he likes it: I take 

   

no charge of him.---Good day, Mr. Smitchenstault. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O! but you have not hear where de sense of my argument lies. 

CRAFTON.
? I have not indeed. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
But you must, tough. I go wid you. 
Taking him by the arm, and speaking busily as they go off. 
De soul is de sublime energy; it is de subtile matter, de, &c. &c. &c. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Crafton and Smitchenstault . 


CHARVILLE now looking without restraint to Mrs. Charville and Freemantle in the garden. 

Very good friends, truly, with their letters and their confidences. That coquettish animation too: they must have some merry joke to laugh thus. No, hang it! 'tis their own damned pleasure in being together. 
Runs to them in the garden, and the scene closes. 


   


ACT II. 

SCENE I. 

--- Mrs. Charville 's Dressing Room. She is discovered with Mary , sitting by a table at work, &c. 


MRS. CHARVILLE.
And you have seen him at Lady Melford's? 

MARY.
Yes. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
And at Harrowgate? 

MARY.
Yes. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
And have danced with him? 

MARY.
Yes. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
And have found him very agreeable? 

MARY.
Yes. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Well, fair befall thee for answering Yes to this 

   

last question! for I did believe thee hypocrite enough to have answered No. 

MARY.
Your opinion of me is flattering. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
How could it be otherwise, seeing you receive him as you did when I called you into the garden? You came forward like a blushing schoolgirl, sent into her governess's parlour to speak to her Town cousin of the fifteenth degree. I'm sure I think Sir Robert Freemantle a Godsend to us, in our present condition. 

MARY.
In your present condition! Is not this your honeymoon with my brother? At least, I should think it is not yet entirely at an end. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
O dear no! But would it had less honey and more shine; we want lemon juice for our sweetness. 

MARY.
? And you are in the way to have it. Indeed, my dear Harriet, if you are not aware, you will soon have too much of it. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Then, if you are afraid of this, do you apply the remedy. 


   


MARY.
Willingly, if it be in my power; but what can I do? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Give me something to amuse and interest me. I know Freemantle will be in love with you, if you take any pains with him.---Nay, don't look so proud, Lady,---I don't mean disingenuous pains; and then I shall have something to think of---something to talk of. 

MARY.
Have you ever been without this last resource? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
O no, Heaven bless me! I can talk of the last foreign mail, or the changing of an old turnpike road, or any thing, rather than hold my tongue. 

MARY.
But you are not reduced to this necessity surely, with Sir Level's taste and Mr. Smitchenstault's philosophy at command. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
But I mean something that is worth talking about. Something that one whispers in the ear; something that one watches an opportunity to communicate; something that one speaks of busily in the twilight, in some private alley, with ? the bats wheeling over one's head; something ---O dear, O dear! I can enjoy this now only by sympathy. 


   

Charville enters by a door behind the Ladies, but stops short on hearing their conversation. 


MARY.
What a long sober face you put on! What are you thinking of now? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Matrimony is a duller thing than I took it to be. 

MARY.
Indeed! 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
I was too foolish: I might have had my amusement for another good winter at least, and have married him after all, if I liked it. 

MARY.
So you married to amuse yourself? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
My dear girl, what could I do? I was with my stiff grave cousins in the country: I was disappointed of a trip to the Continent; the Bath season was still distant, and there was neither county ball, horse-race, nor strolling players in all the country round: so when Charville presented himself again, and renewed his addresses, I was ready to have flown with him to the moon. And now, my dear little sister, if there be any grace in thee, let us have some amusement. 


   


MARY.
Willingly, if I knew how. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Get into some attachment, and difficulties, and correspondences; for, next to receiving a love-letter ? one's self, there is nothing so delightful as peeping into the love-letters of one's neighbours. 

MARY.
Ha, ha, ha! You might be easily satisfied; for I have only to give Mr. Smitchenstault a little encouragement, and we shall have love-letters enough to peep into. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Somebody is coming. 
 Charville retires softly without being perceived, and Smitchenstault , by the opposite door, enters, with heavy creaking steps. 

MARY.
See! the old proverb verified; speak of him, and he appears. Mr. Smitchenstault, you come in good time to give us the benefit of your exquisite sensibility. My sister there is painting a rose, and two buds which seem newly separated from it; and she must not put dew-drops upon each, you know, because that would be formal: now, whether should the rose appear to be weeping for the buds, or the buds for the rose?---the parental or the filial affections prevail? 


   


SMITCHENSTAUDT.
O de nice question! de sweet affection! de dear sympathy! de pretty affection! What you wish me to say? I am no moder; I am no bud; but I have de tender heart. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
So my sister knows Mr. Smitchenstault. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
She know? O de incredible delight! 
To Mary. 
Do you know mine heart? de heart of one who feel all de sublime delicacies, all de ? pretty commotion, all de genteel ecstasies of de soul of one lover. 
Ogling her absurdly. 
Have mine eyes told you all? 

MARY.
Not entirely, my good Sir; for that would have been using your tongue exceedingly ill. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O no! no tongue, no tongue! all heart, true heart, devotioned heart. 
Laying his hand on his breast. 
It be all here trilly, trilly, like de strings of an instrument, de poor instrument dat you will play upon. 

MARY.
Not I, Mr. Smitchenstault; I want skill. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Let me teach you den. O de sweet tuition: 


   


MRS. CHARVILLE.
O the charming preceptor! 


SMITCHENSTAULT bowing conceitedly. 

O, dear Madam! I am de poor unwordy. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Say not unwordy, my dear Sir; don't, I pray you, do yourself that wrong. 


SMITCHENSTAULT bowing again. 

You are very good. But if dere be in me any ting good, any ting noble, any ting amiable, it be all from de passion of mine heart,---dat dear passion dat do make me, one poor philosopher, become like de lofty hero. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
O the surprising transformation! if one's eyes were but gifted enough to perceive it. 


SMITCHENSTAULT turning again to Mary . 

And you do know dat I have de tender heart? 

MARY.
I have not quite so much penetration; but I ? really know that you are very polite and obliging; and perhaps you will have the goodness to hold this skein of silk whilst I wind it. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
De very great honour. 
Holding out his hands, upon which she puts the skein. 


   


MRS. CHARVILLE.
Yes; that rose-coloured silk looks, indeed, like the bands of love; but those don't look quite so like the hands of love: you have been making too free with your snuff-box this morning. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O it is always so; when I am in de great agitations, I take de great snuffs. 

MARY.
So, by this, one may guess at the strength of your passion. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
And I am sure, for these few days past, there is no man in the kingdom who has been within half a pound of tobacco so fervent a lover as Mr. Smitchenstault. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
You do me de great honour. 

Re-enter Charville . 


CHARVILLE.
Ha, Smitchenstault! What do I see? Hercules with Omphale! A philosopher forgetting his dignity, and condescending to amuse himself with girls! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O, dere is de potion dat put all dignity to sleep. 


   


CHARVILLE.
I believe so; and, by my faith! yours is sometimes drugged pretty handsomely. But beware of this potion, which you have, I presume, received ? from one of these ladies; it may be dangerous. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O no! it be only for de sweet mutual enjoyment. 

CHARVILLE.
Well, let it be so; that's prudent; as much of it as either of them will share with you, may be taken with safety. But if this potion should have the same effect upon your genius as on your dignity, what will the admiring and expecting public say to it? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Let it have patience; I will give de public, by and by, all dat it will desire. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
And a little more into the bargain, no doubt, to do the thing handsomely. 

CHARVILLE.
Yes, I'll be bound for it; your doctrine of energies will not be dealt out by such a scanty measure. And pray, amongst all your powers, have you discovered any that can bind the fickle fancy of a woman? 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
O no! no bind!---I do bind nothing,---loose all: dat is my plan; de free plan of nature: so I do teach my pupils. 

CHARVILLE.
A most agreeable lesson, truly: and you will find some ladies very willing to become your pupils; if, indeed, they are not already more qualified to teach than to learn. 

MARY.
Dear brother, how severe you are! But a truce ? to philosophy! It is in matters of taste that we have been craving Mr. Smitchenstault's instruction, though he has not yet told us whether the dew-drops---emblems of sensibility---should be hung upon this rose, or the buds which have been torn from her. 
Pointing to the flowers Mrs. Charville has been painting. 


CHARVILLE eagerly to Mrs. Charville . 

Is it the flower I gave you this morning? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
O dear, no! It is the one Sir Robert Freemantle wore in his button-hole: we have not one in the whole garden of the same species. Come, do you tell us where these same dewdrops should be disposed of on this drawing? 

CHARVILLE.
Dip it into the well, if you please, and it will have drops enough. 


   


MRS. CHARVILLE.
Dear me! you are angry. 

CHARVILLE.
No, faith! It should take a thing of more importance to make a man angry. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Indeed, I think it should. 

Enter Sir Level Clump , skipping joyfully. 


SIR LEVEL.
Huzza, huzza! Come out to the lawn with me; come out to the lawn with me, gentles all, and I will show you a thing. 

CHARVILLE.
What is the matter? 

SIR LEVEL.
Such a discovery! Such a site for a ruin! Such a happy combination! A dilapidated wash-house for the foundation; an old stag-headed ? oak, five Lombardy poplars, and a yew tree in such skilful harmony, the rules of composition could not offer you a better.---You must have an erection there, Mr. Charville; you positively must. There sat a couple of jackdaws upon the oak too, in such harmony with the whole; but they would fly away, hang 'em! 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
That was very perverse of them; I suppose 

   

those same daws belong more to Mr. Smitchenstault's school than to yours, Sir Level. 

SIR LEVEL.
But you lose time, my dear Madam: come away, come away! a hundred pounds or two laid out on the ruin would make it a morsel for the finest Ducal park in the kingdom. 


MARY to Smitchenstault , as they are going. 

But we shall interrupt your instructive conversation. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Never mind: de poor good man! I always indulge de good peoples in dere little folly. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt all but Charville . 


CHARVILLE after musing moodily on the front of the Stage. 

Such a craving for dissipation and change!--- A curious busy imagination.---"Next to receiving a love-letter of one's own, nothing delights one like peeping into the love-letters of one's neighbours;"---the true spirit of intrigue! Ay, but receiving love-letters of one's own; that is the best. A married woman and love-letters! How should she think of love-letters? ? A bad, a suspicious, a dangerous disposition. I think I know myself; I am not prone to suspicion; but for those strange words, I should not have cared a maravedi for her painting that cursed flower. 
Dashing his hand over the papers, and scattering them about. 


   

Re-enter Sir Level Clump . 


SIR LEVEL.
My dear Sir, why do you stay behind---you who are most concerned in this piece of good fortune? You must come out and behold it. A few hundreds---a mere trifle laid out upon it. If I could give it the form of an ancient mausoleum, it would delight you. 

CHARVILLE.
Not a jot, unless you were to bury yourself under it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit the other way. 

SIR LEVEL.
What is the matter? What is the matter? How can I have possibly offended him? I am sure nobody is less teasing or obstrusive than I am. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 
Re-enter Charville . 


CHARVILLE.
Is he gone? He will suspect something: they will all suspect. I must join them, and pretend it was only a feigned displeasure. Married, married! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 


   


SCENE II. 

Mrs. Smoothly 's Room. She enters speaking, and taking a Bandbox from a Servant, who immediately retires. 


SMOOTHLY.
All nonsense! if you had waited for it last night at the waggoner's, you would have got it. 
Alone. 
'Tis well it comes at last: my lady's present bonnet will surely fall to my share now. 
Opening the box. 
Let me see. O how smart and pretty! Did it but fall to my lot, now, to wear such things with their best new face upon them! 
Going to the glass, and putting the bonnet on her head, and then courtesying to herself affectedly. 
Indeed, I beg ten thousand pardons: I thought for to have come for to ride in the park with you earlier; but my Lord,---Sir John, ay, that will do would not allow me; for you know I have not always command of my own horses, and them things we married ladies must submit to. O lud, lud! will it ever come to this? Such fine clothes, such a carriage, such a husband some girls have got, who are not, I'm sure, half so handsome. 
Enter Smitchenstault softly behind her, and looks over her shoulders. 

O mercy on me! 
Shrieking out. 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
Hush, hush! What is de matter? 

SMOOTHLY.
O, it is only you, Sir! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Why, who did you tink? 

SMOOTHLY.
Lud, Sir! they say that when people are vain, the devil is always near to take his advantage of ? it; and when I saw in the glass such a face staring over my shoulder,---O dear! I was frightened out of my wits. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Fy, fy! dere is no devil nor nonsense. I will teach you better dan dat. But dere be de little God of Love: you have heard of him, pretty minx? 

SMOOTHLY.
With his bow, and his quiver, and all that there? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Ay; he it be who do take de advantage,--- who do tempt you, who do tempt me, who do tempt every body. 

SMOOTHLY.
O lud, Sir! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Now, be you quiet; be not so fluster. You 

   

call dat fluster? 
She nods. 
Very well; it be him who do tempt every body. Do you know any body in dis house dat he is tempting now? Tink well before you answer me. 

SMOOTHLY.
You said yourself, Sir. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Yes, but beside me dere is anoder. 


SMOOTHLY coyly. 

La, Sir! how should I know? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
What you tink now of your pretty mistress, de sweet Mary Charville? 

SMOOTHLY.
O Sir! if that is your point, I know nothing of that 
sulkily 
. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
? Come now, be free wid me: dere is for you. Buy ribbon, or de shoe buckle, or what you please. Now you tell me; don't she sometimes speak of me? make de little confidences? 

SMOOTHLY.
O lud, no! ha, ha, ha! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Come, come, no laugh; you not mock me. I know very well; tell me de truth. Dere is more money; dat will buy de little gown, if you please. 

   

Don't she sometime speak of me when you are alone? 

SMOOTHLY.
You are so sinuating!---O dear! to be sure she sometimes does. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
I knew it; I knew dat she did. Now, pretty minx, when she speak of me again to you, and sigh, and do so 
languishing affectedly 
, den do you speak of me too, you know. 

SMOOTHLY.
And what shall I say, Sir? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
All dat you tink. 

SMOOTHLY.
I fear, Sir, that would be of little service to you. You had better tell me precisely what I am to say. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Why---why, you may say dat I am handsome. 

SMOOTHLY.
Very well, Sir: if she is in love with you, she will believe me. And what more shall I say? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Say, dat in her place you would love me too. 

SMOOTHLY.
? O dear, Sir! that would be presumptuous. 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
Poo, poo, poo! not presumptuous. Say you dat, pretty minx, and I tell you a secret: when I marry your lady, I can love you bote. 

SMOOTHLY.
Dear, Sir, would not that be wicked? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Wicked, pretty fool! what be dat ting wicked? I tell you dere be no devil in de world. 

SMOOTHLY.
Truly, Sir, he does not seem to be wanted, while you are here. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Come, come, don't be afraid: I will love you bote. 
Bell rings. 

SMOOTHLY.
My lady's bell: I must go to her immediately. She is in a hurry for her new bonnet. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Remember, den, and take dis wid you. 
Offering to kiss her. 

SMOOTHLY.
O no! I am in a great hurry: we'll put that off for the present. 
Bell rings again. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt severally. 


   


SCENE III. 

The Wood near the House. 

Enter Mary and Sir Robert Freemantle by opposite sides. 


MARY.
Sir Robert Freemantle! 

FREEMANTLE.
Yes, even so; both morning and noon, always Sir Robert Freemantle. However, I don't make this second visit entirely without pretence. My uncle sent me---a very willing messenger, I own---to inform Mrs. Charville that the botanical work she mentioned this morning is out of print, so she need not take the trouble of writing to town for it: but he has it in his library, which is entirely at her service, and will take the liberty of sending it to her. 

MARY.
He is very obliging; and so are you. Shall I turn with you, and meet Mrs. Charville? She is just coming out to walk. 

FREEMANTLE.
This spot is very delightful: had we not better wait for her? Do you begrudge me one moment of your company, which will so soon 

   

pass away? How fleetly that time passes in reality, which from the imagination passes never! 

MARY.
Ay, so it does. 

FREEMANTLE.
Do you remember the evening when we danced together at Lady Milford's? And the morning when I met you on your sorrel mare, crossing the heath at full speed, with your locks ? scattered on the wind like the skirts of some drifted cloud? And that little party to the cottage too? 

MARY.
Yes, I remember it all very well. 

FREEMANTLE.
Very well! I remember it too well. But I distress you, Miss Charville; for you guess what I would say, and my motives for remaining silent on a subject so closely connected with every idea I have formed to myself of happiness. I will not distress you: yet permit me to see you sometimes. Let me call myself your neighbour or your friend.---Ha! Mrs. Charville already! 

Enter Mrs. Charville . 


MRS. CHARVILLE.
I saw you at a distance. How good you are to come to us again! for I have been thinking 

   

of many inquiries I should have made after my friend. However, I need not scourge my poor brains to remember every thing at once; for you are our neighbour, and we shall often meet. 

MARY.
Mr. Crafton has sent by Sir Robert a very obliging message to you. The book you wished to see is out of print, and he will send it from his own library. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Good, dear, sensible Mr. Crafton, to keep such delightful books, and such a messenger to do his errands withal. To-morrow he will send me a ? novel to read---a very scarce, clever work; and the day after that, some verses by a friend we are great critics in poetry, I assure you; and the day after that, a charade; and the day after that, a riddle, of his own writing perhaps; and the day after that---O, we shall make a great many days of the riddle! We need not guess it all at once; that would be improvident. 

FREEMANTLE.
But, my dear Mrs. Charville, will you trust nothing to my own ingenuity in finding out reasons for doing what is so agreeable to me? 

Enter Charville . 



MRS. CHARVILLE to her husband. 

You saw Sir Robert at a distance too, I suppose 

   

We are all gathering round him, I think, like pigeons round a looking-glass. 


CHARVILLE to her. 

I heard your voice at a distance, and guessed you had some cause for such lively animation. 

MARY.
Is my sister often without it? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
If I am, it is but of late. When you look grave 
to Charville  
, it would be undutiful in me to be merry. 


CHARVILLE peevishly. 

You are dutiful, and that makes you grave. 
Striding away from him, muttering to himself. 
I comprehend it; it is all plain enough. 
Checking himself, and returning to Freemantle . 
This beautiful morning, Sir Robert, has tempted you ? to prolong your rambles in the wood: but what has become of Mr. Crafton? 

FREEMANTLE.
He went home some time ago: he dislikes sitting down to dinner fatigued. 

CHARVILLE.
He is right; it is not good for any body. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Then Sir Robert will stay and dine with us, and go home in the cool of the evening. He has 

   

walked a great deal, and must be fatigued, if he return now. 
Looking wistfully to Charville , who is silent. 
This would be a most agreeable arrangement. 
Looks to him again, and he still remains silent. 
Don't you think it would? 

CHARVILLE.
Undoubtedly, if Sir Robert will do me the honour. 

FREEMANTLE.
I am very much obliged to you and Mrs. Charville; but my uncle expects me: it is near his hour. I must deny myself a very great pleasure: I must return immediately. 

CHARVILLE.
Since we are so unfortunate, perhaps you are right. The clouds seem to be gathering for rain. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
It is only the shadow of the trees overhead: the sky is as clear as a mirror. 

CHARVILLE.
Is it the trees? There are shadows somewhere. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
So it seems: but blow them away, pray. I ? can't endure shadows. 

MARY.
Yet you like moonlight and twilight, I think. 


   


MRS. CHARVILLE.
O, to a folly! When owls are hooting, and beetles humming, and bats flying about, making as many circles in the air as a summer shower does on the pool. Did you 
to Charville  
see the bat we caught last night? 

CHARVILLE.
A bat? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Yes, a horned bat; the ominous creature, you know, that fanciful people are frightened at. O yes, you must have seen it, for you are drawing in the muscles of your eyes and face at this very moment in mockery of the creature. 

MARY.
Did you not see it, brother? It was very curious. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
He looks at no creatures but those which are bred in his kennels and his stable. I'll describe it to Sir Robert. 
Going to Sir Robert , and walking with him to the bottom of the Stage, talking, and demonstrating with her hands, while Charville and Mary occupy the front. 

CHARVILLE.
So fond of natural curiosities: this is a new fancy, methinks. 


   


MARY.
No; she is fond of painting butterflies, you know. 

CHARVILLE.
So it seems, so it seems. 
Striding away, and pacing round the Stage with his eyes fixed upon Sir Robert and Mrs. Charville , till he gets close behind them, while they move towards the front. 


MRS. CHARVILLE continuing to speak as she and Freemantle come forward. 

But that kind is larger, and speckled like a wilding's egg, or a cowry, or the back of a trout, ? so pretty, and so minute. 


CHARVILLE thrusting his head between them. 

My Love, you are too minute. You forget that Mr. Crafton is waiting for Sir Robert. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Bless me! is your face there? I thought you were on the other side of us. 

FREEMANTLE.
I am just going, Sir. 

CHARVILLE.
O! Sir Robert, I beg that you will not go sooner than---Mr. Crafton, I know, is apt to be impatient. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
And you have a fellow-feeling for him. 


   



FREEMANTLE to Mrs. Charville . 

So I may venture to tell my uncle that you receive the liberty he has taken in good part. Good day. 
Going. 


MRS. CHARVILLE calling him back. 

But when do you write to your sister? There are many things which I wish to say to her. 


FREEMANTLE returning. 

I shall have the honour to receive your commands on that subject whenever you please. 
She walks with him, again busily talking, to the bottom of the Stage. 

CHARVILLE.
Does she mean to detain him the whole day? 

MARY.
He has been here but a very short time. 

CHARVILLE.
A long half hour by the clock. 

MARY.
It is a clock of your own keeping, brother, and the wheels of it are in your own brain. I reckon it ten minutes. 

CHARVILLE.
Are you bewitched to say so?---He goes; see ? he goes now. No, hang it! he does not go yet. 

MARY.
Why are you so impatient? 


   


CHARVILLE.
I am not impatient: let him stay till doomsday, if he will; but I hate people who are always going and going, and never go. 
Stepping on to them hastily. 
It will rain presently: it rains now; would you stay here to be wet? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Rain! 

CHARVILLE.
I felt a drop on my hand this moment: look there. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
It fell not from the clouds then; but verily, I think, from your own forehead, How warm you are! 
Turning to Freemantle. 
Good day, then, I will not detain you. 
Exit Freemantle . 

To Charville . 
Well, dear Charles, since you are so afraid of the clouds, let us go into the house. But I must visit my bower first. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit swiftly among the trees. 
CHARVILLE after stalking slowly away in another direction, stops short, and returns to Mary , who stands on the front, looking after Freemantle . 


MARY.
Well, brother! 

CHARVILLE.
My dear Mary! 


   


MARY.
Well, brother; what would you say? 

CHARVILLE.
I am going to ask a very foolish---I mean an idle---I should say, an unmeaning question. 

MARY.
Never mind that; what is it? 

CHARVILLE.
Has Freemantle really a sister? 

MARY.
Is it possible that you have forgot the young ? lady whom you used to think poor Mordant resembled? 

CHARVILLE.
Very true; it went out of my head strangely. 

MARY.
Strangely indeed! Could you think he would talk of a sister, if he had none? 

CHARVILLE.
O no, no, no! I have not an atom of suspicion about me; but I thought it might be a sister-in-law, or a brother's wife, or---there is no saying how many intricate relationships people have, now-a-days. 

MARY.
He could have no sister-in-law; for poor Mordant, though distant, is his nearest male relation. 


   


CHARVILLE.
Don't mention that poor wretch. He would be ruined: it was not my doing. 

MARY.
Did you dissuade him from playing? and were you obliged to receive all that he lost? My dear brother, let me speak to you on this subject when you are composed and at leisure. 

CHARVILLE.
I am composed enough, but certainly not at leisure. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt severally. 

SCENE IV. 

An outer Court adjoining to the House. 

Enter Isaac with a Letter, and immediately followed by Mrs. Smoothly . 


SMOOTHLY.
Where are you going with that letter, Isaac? 

ISAAC.
To Squire Crafton's. 

SMOOTHLY.
Is it for the Squire himself? 

ISAAC.
I bien't good at reading handy writ, as how my wit never lay that way; but I guess that it is 

   

either for the Squire himself, or some of the gentle folks of his family. 

MRS. SMOOTHLY.
A clever guess truly; thy wit, I think, must lie that way. Give me the letter; I'll take it; I'm going there, at any rate. 


ISAAC giving her the letter. 

There it is: I knows you like an errand to that house to see somebody. 

SMOOTHLY.
Dost thou think I would go to see nobody, foolish oaf? 

ISAAC.
Ha, but a favourite somebody. Ay, ay! I knows what I knows. John, the butler, is a mighty fine man, and goes to church dressed like a squire of a Sunday, and the poor silly tits of the village courtesy as he passes, and call him "Sir." I knows what I knows. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

SMOOTHLY.
Do they suspect me, then? I'll hide this in my bosom, and nobody else shall know where I am going. 

Enter Charville . 


CHARVILLE.
What letter is that you are hiding so carefully? 

SMOOTHLY.
? O lud, Sir! 


   


CHARVILLE.
What, you are nervous, are you? I say, what letter is that? Who is it for? 

SMOOTHLY.
Lud, Sir, I never read the direction, it's for the post. 

CHARVILLE.
Why need you go out with it, then, when the letter-box is in the hall? Give it to me, and I'll put it in. 

SMOOTHLY.
O Sir, that wo'n't take it to the place it is going to. 

CHARVILLE.
Did you not tell me this moment that it is for the post? 

SMOOTHLY.
Did I, Sir? I was wrong, Sir; I must take it myself. 

CHARVILLE.
Come, come; no more waiting-maid prevarications! Give me the letter, I charge you, and I'll take it where it should go. Give me the letter this instant. 


SMOOTHLY giving it unwillingly. 

There, Sir. 


CHARVILLE looking at the direction. 

By heaven and earth just what I expected. 
Sternly to her. 
And you did not know to 

   

whom this letter is directed? 
Motioning her to go as she is about to speak. 
Away, away! Tell me no more lies: I'll take care of this letter. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt severally. 

SCENE V. 

The Butler's Room. 

Enter Dickenson with a Paper in his Hand, which he looks upon ruefully. 


DICKENSON.
Ay, this was the state of the cellar: what it will be soon, if all these palavering people, with their improvements and philosophy, stay much longer in the house, the Lord knows! That good bin of claret is melting away most piteously. Who's there? 
Enter Charville . 

My master. I beg your honour's pardon. 

CHARVILLE.
Hush! Let me be here for a little while. 

DICKENSON.
What is the matter, Sir? you are very pale. 

CHARVILLE.
Nothing, nothing. Watch on the outside of the door, and prevent any body coming in: there is not a room in my own house where I can be at peace for a few minutes to read a letter. 


   


DICKENSON.
Are they in your study, Sir? 

CHARVILLE.
Yes, yes! Sir Level is there with his cursed plans: they are in my dressing-room too; they are every where. Watch by the door, I say, for a few minutes. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Dickenson . 
Taking out the letter with agitation. 

"To Sir Robert Freemantle." Her own handwriting: that fair character for such foul ends! What man on earth would not do as I do? 
Breaking open the seal. 
A cover only. The enclosed. 
Reads again. 
"To Miss Freemantle." Is this all? 
Examining the envelope. 
What's ? here? A coarse scratched drawing of a horned bat. 
Reads again. 
"You will understand what I mean by this, though it is but a scratch."--- No more! By Jove there is some mischievous meaning under this! It is my likeness she would give under that of a bat, and she will add the horns to the original, if she can. 
Reads again. 
"To Miss Freemantle." If this should be a device now, lest the letter should be opened! I'll pawn my life it is. "To Miss Freemantle." We shall see; we shall see. 
Tears open the enclosed letter. 
Mercy on us! three pages and a half so closely written! 


DICKENSON without. 

You shan't come in, I say. 


   


CHARVILLE.
Who's there? 
Huddling up the papers. 
I must have time to read all this. 
Noise of voices without. 
What's that? 

Re-enter Dickenson . 


DICKENSON.
They are inquiring for you, Sir. Ladies and gentlemen, and all; they are going to walk. 

CHARVILLE.
Let them go where they please. I'll take my walk elsewhere. 

DICKENSON.
You may go out by the back stair, Sir. 

CHARVILLE.
So I will; that is well thought of thee, good Dickenson. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 

ACT III. 

SCENE I. 

--- Charville 's private Library. He is discovered sitting by a table with the letter in his hand. 



CHARVILLE reading. 

"My dear Charlotte, I rejoice so much in the happy chance."---Psha! I have read it a hundred 

   

times since yesterday. I'll look upon the hateful scrawl no more. 
Tosses it from him, paces in a disordered manner about the room, then returns to it again. 
What, does it take hold of me still? the fascination of a snake is about it; I cannot keep away from it: I must read that passage once more. 
Sits down again and reads. 
"Ah the cross fate that separates us so cruelly! We were once, as you know, within an ace of coming together, of consummating that dearest wish of my heart. Those dear woods of Oakenly! how dear they would then have been! The tender green boughs of spring with all their lovely blossoms would have smelt more fragrant; the birds would have sung more melodiously; the fair face of nature would have smiled more sweetly." These the sentiments, these expressions of one woman to another! It is as evidently a loveletter, as that my clenched fist presses this table. Some part indeed seems irrelevant; but far less ingenious commentators than our ancient text books have been handled by would find no difficulty in it at all.---Ay, plain enough: here ? is a good rule to try it by: substitute Robert for Charlotte, and there is sense in it; without this, it is a mass of absolute absurdity. All this pains! Why not? I have heard of most intricate ciphering made use of in such clandestine matters. This is simple and more ingenious still---and yet---pest take these tormenting 

   

incongruities! Go, vile scrap! I must tear thee to atoms or thou wilt craze my brain. 
Tearing the letter furiously. 
Enter DICKENSON . 


Angrily. 
Who's there? 

DICKENSON.
Mr. Crafton wishes to speak with your Honour. 

CHARVILLE.
Let him speak with the devil! are not the ladies below? 

DICKENSON.
Yes, Sir; but he has express business with yourself, and would follow me up stairs. 


CHARVILLE in a whisper. 

Is he behind thee? 

DICKENSON.
Yes, Sir, close at hand. 


CHARVILLE in a low voice. 

Let him come then, since it cannot be helped. 
Gathering up the torn papers hastily while Crafton enters. 

CRAFTON.
Good morning, Sir; pray let me assist you. 

CHARVILLE.
O Sir, I beg---I shall do it myself in a moment. 

CRAFTON.

Stooping. 
Pray allow me; the pieces are as 

   

? numerous, as if you had been plucking a goose, yet from your countenance I should rather have expected it to be a crow. 

CHARVILLE.
No, nothing; an old tailor's bill that gave me trouble once, and I had a spite at it. 

CRAFTON.
And you have wreaked your vengeance on it unsparingly. 

CHARVILLE.
I think Dickenson said you were come to me on business. Have the goodness to be seated. 

CRAFTON.
No I thank you; it can be settled in a few words. 

CHARVILLE.
Well, Sir. 

CRAFTON.
Our neighbour Dobson is going to sell his little farm; now it is a desirable possession for either of us, and I should like to add it to my own estate; yet I would by no means enter into competition with a purchaser of your calibre. 

CHARVILLE.
I am very much obliged to you, Mr. Crafton; I'll consider of it; it is a very good aspect for apple trees. 

CRAFTON.
For apples! you surely mistake me: it is 

   

Dobson's farm I mean; it is not my own little paddock, I assure you; that I will never part with. 

CHARVILLE.
I beg your pardon: I heard you imperfectly. ? The farm! well, I shall consider of it. I am greatly obliged to you. Are you alone this morning? 

CRAFTON.
Yes, my nephew is gone. 

CHARVILLE.
Ha! gone! It is a delightful day for his journey: I am glad---I mean glad of the fine weather he is getting. I wish him a pleasant journey with all my heart. 

CRAFTON.
He is not gone a journey; he is only sporting with Squire Ruddley; I expect him to dinner. 

CHARVILLE.
That's all---I was afraid---I thought somebody had told me he was going to leave you soon. 

CRAFTON.
Myself, perhaps; for I had no idea when he came to me that he would have staid so long. But he has been so happy since he came, and you have become such a kind and agreeable neighbour to him, that I don't know when he will go.--- However, it is all very well, he has no agreeable 

   

home to go to, and I am the better for his company. I should not wonder now if he were to spend the best part of every summer with me. 

CHARVILLE.
A very bad---I mean a very extraordinary arrangement. Why does he not marry? 

CRAFTON.
Why, in the first place, he has little money to ? keep house upon, and he is so whimsical and scrupulous that he will marry no woman, forsooth, unless he be in love with her; and a young man's inclinations, you know, Charville, will not be controlled by prudence and propriety: they will wander here and there.---O dear! every where, where they should not. 
After a long pause. 
Well, you say you will consider of it. 
Another pause. 
Yes, I see you are considering of it. 

CHARVILLE.
O no, not at all. The orchard-field that you wish me to purchase. 

CRAFTON.
No no, my dear sir; the little farm which I do not wish you to purchase. 

CHARVILLE.
I mean so, I mean so; I'll think of it at leisure. 

CRAFTON.
And when you have done so, you will have the goodness to let me know the result. 


   


CHARVILLE.
Certainly. 

CRAFTON.
Good morning: I'll intrude upon your time no longer. 

CHARVILLE.
Good morning. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Crafton . 

Alone, after musing for a little. 
"Every where, where they should not." Did he not glance at something in these words. "Young men's inclinations will not be controlled."---"Every ? where, where they should not."---I'll go live in the Hebrides---at Johny Grott's house---I'll travel for improvement to Kamschatka, rather than live here with such a neighbour as this at my elbow.---What noise is that? 

Enter Dickenson . 

What do you want? 

DICKENSON.
Would you have the closet doors set to rights, Sir? the locksmith is here. 

CHARVILLE.
Who sent for him now? 

DICKENSON.
My mistress, Sir. 

CHARVILLE.
For what purpose? 


   


DICKENSON.
To have a better lock put upon the north door of her dressing room. 

CHARVILLE.
On that door? has it not been nailed up for a long time? 

DICKENSON.
Yes, Sir, but she has a fancy to have it opened. 

CHARVILLE.
A fancy! I'll have no locksmiths: I'll have none of his jobs done here. 

DICKENSON.
It would be so convenient for my lady, Sir; for it leads to the back staircase. 

CHARVILLE.
It leads to the black devil!---Let him take his smutty face out of my house, I say; I'll have none of his jobs done here. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Dickenson . 
Preparations making for some damned plot or other. O, if I could but devise some ? means of coming at the bottom of it!---Wonderfully anxious that I should go from home now and then; to amuse myself; to bring her the news, forsooth.---Could I but devise any means. 
Stands a while considering, then takes a turn across the room with slow thoughtful steps, then rouses himself suddenly, and rings the bell. 


   

Re-enter Dickenson . 

Yes, it is you that I want. I have something to say to you. 

DICKENSON.
At your pleasure, Sir. 

CHARVILLE.
It is the little cottage by the brook which you wished to have for your sister? 

DICKENSON.
Yes, please your honour, but you said it could not be spared; so I would not tease you about it any more. 

CHARVILLE.
She shall have it. 

DICKENSON.
Bless your honour! and the widow's blessing shall be upon you also. It is so very good of you to think of that just now: it is more than I could have expected. 

CHARVILLE.
Well, say no more about it; the cottage is hers.--- 
 Dickenson bows gratefully, and is got as far as the door, to go away. 
---Come back, Dickenson. 

DICKENSON.
Your honour? 

CHARVILLE.
This is not all I have to say, my good Dickenson. 

   

--- 
A pause, Dickenson expecting what he is further to say. 
? Hast thou ever been frolicsome in thy youth? 

DICKENSON.
Sir! 

CHARVILLE.
I don't mean in any bad way, Dickenson. Don't look so surprised, man: yet I think thou wilt be somewhat surprised when I tell thee what has come into my head. 

DICKENSON.
It is not for me to judge of your honour's notions. 

CHARVILLE.
Thou wilt hardly guess what I am going to say. 

DICKENSON.
No, Sir, but something for your own good, I doubt not. 

CHARVILLE.
Nay, don't look so grave; I am only going to try a little frolic. 

DICKENSON.
That is what I should never have guessed, I confess. 

CHARVILLE.
O! only a mere whim; eve y body has their whims: it is a whim in your mistress, now, to have that door opened. 


   


DICKENSON.
Belike, Sir. 

CHARVILLE.
But then you must hear what my whim is. I am to go from home, you know, this morning with Sir Level; but I shall soon leave him and return again, unknown to every creature in the ? family but thyself. Now, couldst thou provide some disguise for me that I may not be known? 

DICKENSON.
Lord, Sir! every body in the house will know that anxious look of yours, and the sound of your voice. 

CHARVILLE.
Do I look so very anxious, then? 

DICKENSON.
Of late, Sir, you have; just, if I may be so bold, as though you thought somebody were hatching a plot against you. 

CHARVILLE.
Ha! dost thou know of any plot? 

DICKENSON.
Lord forbid, Sir! I'm sure that claret has been as honestly drank at your table--- 

CHARVILLE.
Hang the claret! thou art as honest a butler as ever drew cork.---But as I said, Dickenson, I should like to remain for some time in the 

   

house disguised: is the new servant, who is coming to be trained under thee, known to any one in the family? 

DICKENSON.
No, Sir, not a soul has ever seen him. 

CHARVILLE.
Let me put on the livery intended for him, and prevent him from coming till my turn is served. 

DICKENSON.
Lord, Sir! would you so far demean yourself? 

CHARVILLE.
Never trouble thy head about that. Come and show me the livery, and I'll tell thee more ? about it afterwards. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 

SCENE II. 

The Drawing-room. A Table for Tea set out. Enter Dickenson carrying a Tea-board, which he places on the Table; and on the opposite Side Mrs. Smoothly , who goes prying about the Room. 


DICKENSON.
What are you looking for, Mr. Smoothly? 

SMOOTHLY.
Only my mistress's work-bag: she desired me to finish the collar she has been working at so 

   

long. We poor waiting gentlewomen have all them tedious matters to finish , as it is called; that is to say, to do two thirds of the whole. 

DICKENSON.
Yonder it lies: I desired my new man to clear the table for tea, and he has put every thing upon the chairs, I see, which he should not have done. But he'll know better by and by. 

SMOOTHLY.
It will always be by and by with him, I fear, poor stupid oaf. I wonder you could bring such a creature into the family. Isaac tells me he has spilt a plate of soup on my mistress's gown at dinner, which is very hard upon me, Mr. Dickenson. To have the fingerless fool spoiling my perquisites! 

DICKENSON.
You'll get the gown all the sooner for that: why, he's serving you, child. 

SMOOTHLY.
Serving me! I should have had it in a fortnight, and not a smutch upon it. And what do you think of his sneaking behind doors, and listening too?---Speak of the devil and he appears: I see him at this very moment lurking in ? the passage. 
Calling off the stage. 
Come in, sirrah; it is you I am talking of, and I'll say all I have said to your face. 
Enter Charville , disguised in livery, and a silver waiter in his 

   

hand. 
I say, sirrah, you are a dirty, sneaking, curious fellow. What business had you to stand listening at my lady's door when I was dressing her for dinner? 

CHARVILLE.
I mistuke the door, gentlewoman, judging as how it was the parlour. 

SMOOTHLY.
Take you care again, lest I mistuke your nose for the handle of the door, and give it such a turn as shan't be for the beautifying of that knave's face of yours. 

DICKENSON.
Fy, Mrs. Smoothly! don't rate him so for a mistake. 

SMOOTHLY.
Mistake truly! he mistakes every nook and corner in the house, where he can stick himself up to listen, for the parlour.---Take care, sirrah; for if I catch that snout of yours again where it should not be, I'll take the tongs in my hand, and treat you as St. Dunstan did the devil. I'll teach you to sneak, and to pry, and to haunt one so: I'll teach--- 

DICKENSON.
Nay, nay, Mrs. Smoothly, perhaps he is in love with you: you shou'd have pity on the ? young man. 


   


SMOOTHLY.
In love, indeed! Such a creature as that in love with me! I wonder, Mr. Dickenson, that a man of your sense and discretion should take upon you to bring such an oaf into genteel service. Wait till your master return; he'll not suffer such a shambling fellow in his house, I'll assure you. 

CHARVILLE.
Mayhap measter may think better of me than you trow, gentlewoman. 

SMOOTHLEY.
I trow this, however, that he'll make thee pay for thy prying. He likes that business himself too well to share it with thee, I can assure thee. 

DICKENSON.
For shame, for shame! to put yourself in a passion for such trifles. Don't you hear the company coming from the dining room? 

SMOOTHLEY.
Are they? 
Snatches the work-bag from the chair, and exit. 


CHARVILLE looking after her. 

The fair, obliging, pretty-spoken Mrs. Smoothly! Heaven preserve us! What creatures we may find women to be when we get behind the curtain! --- 
To Dickenson. 
They're coming, you say. I'll retire to the darker end of the room; for Smitchenstault gave me such a look of examination 

   

at dinner, that I began to dread detection. 

DICKENSON.
You need not fear him now, for he has taken ? his coffee below, and is retired to his room for the rest of the evening. 

CHARVILLE.
Did my wife give him a hint to retire? 

DICKENSON.
No, Sir? Why should she? 

CHARVILLE.
O nothing!---No reason at all. I only thought she might have done so. He is tiresome enough sometimes, and---O no, no reason at all. 

DICKENSON.
I think he has got some stones in his pocket, and is going to write something about his jolligy. 

CHARVILLE.
He said that himself, did he?---Ha! Here they come. 

DICKENSON.
I think you had better retire till they ring. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Charville and Dickenson , and enter Mrs. Charville and Mary , followed by Sir Robert Freemantle . 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
But, Sir Robert, you have never said a word to me the whole day of the letter I sent to your 

   

care, and the elegant drawing on the envelope. You have surely received it. 

FREEMANTLE.
I most surely have not. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
I gave it to the servant early in the morning. Can he have been so negligent? 

FREEMANTLE.
The fault lies with my own man probably: he is a careless knave: I shall find it on my table when I go home. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
You will have a great loss, else, I assure you. 

FREEMANTLE.
A drawing too! 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
? Yes; a most beautiful sketch of the curious bat, which you thought might be of the same kind with that which you caught last summer in Cornwall. 

MARY.
But the greatest loss of all would be Miss Freemantle's. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Hush, child! keep my secret. 

MARY.
It wont keep. 


   


MRS. CHARVILLE.
Then, I'll tell it myself. Long ago, Charlotte and I wrote romantic sentimental letters to one another, in imitation of the novels we were then so fond of; and now I have commenced my correspondence with her again in style, that will, I know, afford her a good hearty laugh, if she don't think my head turned altogether. 

FREEMANTLE.
Is it sealed up? Could not one have a peep at it? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Not for the world. But if you have great pleasure in reading curious letters, Mary can indulge you with one. She has a curiosity in her possession that is worth the gold of Ophir. Pray go and fetch it, my dear sister, if there be any good nature in thee, and I know thou hast a great deal. 

MARY.
So entreated, how can I resist? 

FREEMANTLE.
? Must you have the trouble of going for it? O! no, no. I'll see it another time. 

MARY.
Indeed it is no trouble; I shall find it presently. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

FREEMANTLE.
And in the mean time shall we examine that 

   

bust with the light cast down upon it? You will find that it has, so viewed, a beautiful effect. 
Takes a candle from the table, and goes behind a large screen at the bottom of the room, followed by Mrs. Charville , when, from the door left ajar by Mary , enters Charville . 

CHARVILLE.
So, so, so! The philosopher sent off, and my sister sent off, and the screen to befriend them besides. 
Hearing them speak indistinctly behind the screen. 
Speaking low, too. Cautious enough, I find. Something bad in so much caution. 
Drawing softly near the screen. 


FREEMANTLE behind the scene. 

Such beauty and expression! 

CHARVILLE.
Ay, ay, ay! The devil himself hath no need of the forbidden fruit, if he will talk to a woman of her beauty.--- 
They speak again indistinctly. 
What are they saying now? It sounded like husband. O virtuous lady! she recollects that she has a husband.---Some little impediment to be sure. 


FREEMANTLE as before. 

And that look of modesty, too, forbidding all --- 
the rest of the sentence spoken indistinctly. 

CHARVILLE.
Her modesty indeed! that wont stand in the way.---They speak low again: they are whispering 

   

? now. They are; flesh and blood can endure it no longer! 
Running to the table, and throwing some of the china on the floor, when Freemantle and Mrs. Charville , alarmed by the noise, come hastily from behind the screen. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
That awkward fellow again breaking more china.--- 
To Charville . 
This seems to be your only occupation in the family, Barnaby! Ha, ha, ha! how bewildered he looks! What brought you here now? You should never come but when the bell rings. 

CHARVILLE.
Lud! They be always ringing in my ears, bells here and bells there, and silver cups a clattering. I does not know when I be wanted. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
I'm sure, Barnaby, I does not know neither; for I know nothing on this earth that one could want thee for, unless it were, for spite, to hand a cup of tea at a time to scald a neighbour's fingers.--- 
To Freemantle as Charville retires. 
Did you ever see such a looking creature? 

FREEMANTLE.
I don't know; he puts me strangely in mind of somebody or other, and I can't recollect who. Where does he come from? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Dickenson says from Yorkshire. 


   


FREEMANTLE.
It may be so, but his dialect belongs to no county in England that I am acquainted with.--- 
 Mary heard speaking without. 
Don't stand here, young man; keep below till you are called ? for. 

Re-enter Mary . 


MARY.
Here is the letter,---a love-letter from an old schoolmaster to his mistress: but you must read it, sister, for I can't do it justice. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
As you please, but make us some tea first; the cramp words that are in it require a ready articulation. 

Mary begins to prepare tea, when enter Dickenson , and Charville peeping behind him. 


DICKENSON.
Ladies, I am sorry to alarm you, but there is a man below who says, he has found a person at the foot of a tree, not far from the house, who seems to be in pain, and that when he spoke to him the voice which answered him again resembled my master's. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Foolish fancy! but let us relieve the poor man whoever he may be. 
Exeunt Mary and Freemantle hastily. 
It is a cold night, sister; 

   

stay and put on a shawl.--- 
To Dickenson . 
Bring me that shawl from the next room.--- 
 Charville gives a sign to Dickenson , and goes for the shawl himself. 
Surely, Dickenson, you don't believe that it can possibly be Mr. Charville: you would be more alarmed if you thought so. There is some trick in this: I know it by that smile on your face. 
 Dickenson retires without answering, and Charville re-enters with the shawl. 
That is a lace shawl, foolish fellow, ? bring me the other. That would keep nobody warm, and be torn on the bushes besides. 


Charville rending the shawl in anger, and speaking in his natural voice. 

And let it be torn into a thousand pieces! A bit of paltry lace, or any thing, is of more importance to you than the fate of your miserable husband. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Ha! is it you? 

CHARVILLE.
Ay, you may start as if you saw an apparition from another world. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Nay, there is nothing like the other world about you. That coat and wig, and that ludicrous visage of yours, belong neither to angel nor demon, and are altogether earthly, I assure you; much more an object of laughter than of 

   

fear. Ha! ha! ha! What made you put on such a ludicrous disguise? If I were a vain woman, now, I should think you were jealous. 

CHARVILLE.
Call it by what name you please, Madam; but the levity of your conduct, the unblushing partiality shown on every occasion to that minion of your fancy, your total want of regard for myself, but poorly concealed under the mask of easy general carelessness, has raised up that within me which every man must feel, who is not as insensible as the earth on which he treads. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
? And you have, in serious earnestness, thus disguised yourself to be a spy upon my conduct. And you have, no doubt, made some notable discovery to justify your suspicion. 

CHARVILLE.
Madam, madam! this is no time for trifling. It is for you to justify---I mean explain those appearances, if they have indeed deceived me. Why is Sir Robert Freemantle so often in this house, and received by you with such indecorous pleasure and familiarity? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Had you asked me that question before with open and manly sincerity, you should have had an answer as open and sincere; but since you have preferred plots, and disguises, and concealment, 

   

even make it out your own way. It would be an affront to your skill and sagacity to satisfy your curiosity independently of them. 
Going. 

CHARVILLE.
Do you mean to expose me to the whole house? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
No, Charles; you can never be exposed, cruel as you are, without my sharing in the shame.--- Oh! oh! has it come to this. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit weeping. 

CHARVILLE.
Ha! does she weep? 
Running after her, and then stopping short. 
No, no! she does not: there is too much parade with her cambric handkerchief ? for real tears: she does not weep; and yet I could tear my hair for spite that she does not. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

ACT IV. 

SCENE I. 

---A Back Court, belonging to the House; Sancho discovered waiting by the Gate. 


SANCHO.
Now, we see---we see. White man great deal of money---read book---know all tat be 

   

good. We see---we see. I wait long---O here he come! 
Enter Dickenson . 

Well, friend, what say your massa to my massa? 

DICKENSON.
He has nothing to say to him at all. He is very angry with your massa. 

SANCHO.
Very angry! Ay, my massa be poor, and every body be angry wit him.---Your massa not angry, your massa very fond of him when he shake a te dice, and take all te money from him. Te tevil will shake him over te great fire for tat. ---You tell him, he be in prison; he be cold; he be hungry? 

DICKENSON.
I told him every thing you desired me, but he has nothing to say to you. He is very angry, and wont see you. 

SANCHO.
Angry! Wont see me! He shall see me. I watch him; I speak to him; I deal wit him. Angry! White man angry! Black man angry too. 
Going. 

DICKENSON.
Stay a little: he sent this for yourself to pay your way back again to London. 
Offering him money, which he scornfully casts away. 


   


SANCHO.
None for myself; me will beg my way back; ? me will take noting of him but his heart's blood, and tat I will take if I should give him mine own in return.---May his money choke him! May te white tevil tear him! May his moter curse him!---Angry! Sancho be angry too. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

DICKENSON.
Poor creature! I pity him: but he'll beg his way back well enough. He has been used to it, no doubt, in his own country. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

SCENE II. 

An old dismal-looking Chamber. 

Enter Mrs. Smoothly and Dolly by a concealed door in the pannelling of the walls, carrying lights, which they place on a table. 


DOLLY.
What a dismal ghastly-looking place! It looks as like a chamber where some wicked thing has been done as any I ever see'd. 

SMOOTHLY.
But no wicked thing has been done in this chamber, foolish creature! though a wicked man died here. 


   


DOLLY.
Ay, no wonder he comes back again, since he was so wicked. I marvel you thought of taking the haunted chamber for playing your tricks in with that poor 'losopher: I durst as soon think of taking the church or the vestry.---What's that? 

SMOOTHLY.
I heard nothing. Poor creature! you are so ignorant, Dolly, and that makes you frightened. Don't you know that ghosts and all them terrible things never appear till midnight? 

DOLLY.
And if so be, why did you ax me to keep you company? Housekeeper wants me below to pick raisins. 

SMOOTHLY.
O la! I a'n't frightened; but I thought I should weary somehow to wait by myself. 

DOLLY.
Ah, Mrs. Smoothly, it don't become me to say so, but I be feared that you and the 'losopher mean to do some'at that a'n't right. 

MRS. SMOOTHLY.
? Nothing worse than cajoling him out of a little money, which he loves like his own life; and punishing him for being so conceited as to believe that my mistress, forsooth, would make an appointment with such a ragamuffin as him. 


   


DOLLY.
Hark; he's coming now. Good luck to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 
Enter Smitchenstault hastily and alarmed. 


MRS. SMOOTHLY.
My dear Mr. Smitchenstault; dear deceiver! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
No honey words. 

SMOOTHLY.
What's the matter? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Some one pursues me: hide me somewhere. 

SMOOTHLY.
Mercy on us! 
opening the door of a small closet. 
Go in there. 
Puts him in. 
I'll get off altogether. 
Runs to the concealed door by which Dolly had gone out. 
She has shut it so hard, stupid idiot, that it won't open. What shall I do? O I remember. 
Opens an old wardrobe press, and creeps into it. 

Enter Charville , followed by Dickenson . 



CHARVILLE speaking as he enters. 

No; I could not be deceived. I'll take my oath it was he. If I had not stumbled in the gallery at that other cursed door, I should have got up to him. 

DICKENSON.
Surely, Sir, your eyes have deceived you: it 

   

could not be Sir Robert Freemantle that you saw. 

CHARVILLE.
Deceived! Do I not know his form, his size, his manner? Fiends seize him! I know them ? too well: they are before mine eyes all day long. 

DICKENSON.
Then, perhaps, they were only before your eyes now in the same manner. 

CHARVILLE.
No, no, no! Thou makest me mad. Do I not know one thing from another? Cannot one know one hateful face from another, though one be not absolutely within arms' length of the pest? 

DICKENSON.
Nay, if your honour saw the face. 

CHARVILLE.
Saw it or saw it not, I'll be sworn it was him. Did you not say yourself that you saw a man run hastily up stairs? 

DICKENSON.
Yes, Sir; but it appeared to me to be Mr. Smitchenstault. 

CHARVILLE.
Smitchenstault! Think'st thou I should not know a hog from a greyhound? Is Smitchenstault tall? 

DICKENSON.
I cannot say he is. 


   


CHARVILLE.
The figure I saw was tall? Is he slender? 

DICKENSON.
I cannot say he is. 

CHARVILLE.
The figure I saw was slender. Has he, in any respect, the appearance of a gentleman? 

DICKENSON.
Not much of that, I confess. 

CHARVILLE.
Then, teaze me no more by saying it was Smitchenstault; it was the devil as soon. Where can he have disappeared? There is no door for ? him to escape by. 

DICKENSON.
What if it should be some apparition that has deceived you? This is the haunted chamber which has been shut up so long, and why it is open to-night, and lights burning, I cannot imagine. 

CHARVILLE.
Ay, ay! There is always a ghost or a haunted chamber wherever intrigue and treachery are at work. But if it be not a spirit, I will dislodge it. 

DICKENSON.
The closet door seems to move. 


CHARVILLE running to the door. 

I cannot open it; somebody presses it to in the inside. Go fetch my pistols: I'll send a brace 

   

of bullets through it, and prove if the thing within be flesh and blood, or not. Run for my pistols, I say. 


SMITCHENSTAULT bursting from the closet. 

Don't fire de pistol! I am blood and flesh. 

CHARVILLE.
You here! Where is Freemantle? It was him I followed along the gallery, if there be any truth in vision. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Yes, dere be great trute in vision: it is one of senses. I feel, I see, I taste, I smell, I hear;--- one of de laws of nature which do force belief. 

CHARVILLE.
Pest take your philosophy! Where is Freemantle? Where is the man I saw before me in the gallery? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Gone out by dat door. 
Pointing to the panel. 

CHARVILLE.
? Is there a door here? 
Searching for it. 


DICKENSON to Smitchenstault . 

Pray, Sir, how did you see him? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
I peep tro' de chinks of de closet, and see him pass. 

DICKENSON.
And what brought you here, Mr. Smitchenstault? 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
Only to take de little pleasance wid Mrs. Smootly, who is very fond of me. 

DICKENSON.
How could that be, when there is no door there? 


CHARVILLE having just discovered. 

Faith! but there is though, which confirms every word he has said. 
Bursts open the concealed door, and exit, followed by Dickenson . 


SMOOTHLY bursting from her hiding place in a rage. 

O you lying serpent! Pleasance with Mrs. Smoothly, indeed! Very fond of you! Pretty pleasance, indeed! I could burst with vexation. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Dear, dear: what for all dis? 

SMOOTHLY.
And to take my name in your mouth too! Would not Dolly or the dairy-maid have suited as well for your excuse? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Dear me, pretty moute! too pretty to speak de scold. 


SMOOTHLY pushing him off. 

Keep your distance, I say. Pleasance with me, indeed! Such a lie; such an aggravated lie; I detest all lies! Pleasance, indeed. 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
Don't be so angry; dere be no pleasance in dat, and dere be no reasons neider: and every ? body ought to speak wid reasons. 

SMOOTHLY.
You provoke me worser and worser with your reasons. Pleasance with such a creature as you! I shan't be able to hold up my head in the family again; no, never. I'll let them all know what kind of a man you are. I'll let Miss Charville know that you only court her for her fortune. I'll--- 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Hush, hush, hush! de poor pretty, angry, goody girl: here is de money for you. 

SMOOTHLY.
I'll have none of your money. 
Going off disdainfully. 


SMITCHENSTAULT following her. 

O but you will to': it is gold money, my dear, pretty, honey moute. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE III. 

The Library. 

Enter Crafton and Sir Level Clump , by opposite sides. 


SIR LEVEL.
Good morning, Sir; you have followed my intimation pretty rapidly. 

CRAFTON.
Sooner than you expected? too soon? 

SIR LEVEL.
By no means; I am heartily glad of it; for it argues that you still bear the same partiality for this delightful place, and now is your favourable opportunity. 

CRAFTON.
Has Charville at length resolved to sell it? 

SIR LEVEL.
Resolved! I should not say resolved. 

CRAFTON.
Then say what you please, and I'll listen. 

SIR LEVEL.
Mr. Charville, I don't know how, for I am but just come from a little expedition in the way of my profession, has taken a disgust to it.---I don't mean such as will incline him to sell it for an old song neither; but, in short, I give you 

   

notice as a friend, that you may have it now if you please. 

CRAFTON.
And you do so with Charville's permission. 

SIR LEVEL.
Yes---no---ay, in some measure I may say ---I don't know that I can say so altogether. 

CRAFTON.
Nay, my good Sir Level, you have taken so much pains in matters of taste to make every thing plain, and smooth, and orderly, be so obliging as to infuse a little of this same ? improving simplicity into matters of business. It does not signify to me two straws whether Mr. Charville sends me this notice directly or indirectly. The same reasonable offer which I made him for the property two years ago I am willing to make him again, and more than this I cannot and will not give. 

SIR LEVEL.
Property! what a bargain-making name you give to it now! the place of your nativity, the beauty of which you so much and so justly admired. Can any thing of sylvan scenery be more charming? 

CRAFTON.
And your tone is somewhat altered also, my good Sir Level: this same sylvan scenery was only practicable ground when you last spoke of 

   

it to me. I must e'en repeat to you again, that I will make the same offer for it which I made to him two years ago. 

SIR LEVEL.
But consider, my dear sir, how much it has been improved since then. My plans have been already executed, and this, though it may not become me to say so, should weigh with you greatly. 

CRAFTON.
I am sure it weighs heavily. 

SIR LEVEL.
And look here at this sketch 
unrolling a large plan upon the table 
? ---look what groves, what lawns, what sweeping declivities and acclivities, what harmonious undulations! you shall have this plan---the benefit of all this tasteful design into the bargain. 

CRAFTON.
No, Sir Level; I am not such a Jew as to crib that in, along with the rest. I'll first, if you please, purchase the estate in my own plain way, and then you may ask as much as you like for your plan afterwards. This is, in my simple conceit, the best way of proceeding. 
 Sir Level turns peevishly away. 
You think differently, I see. But here comes Mr. Charville himself. 

Enter Charville . 



SIR LEVEL aside to Charville as he enters. 

He's a cunning hunks,---can make nothing of 

   

him. Will only give the old price. Deal warily with him. 

CRAFTON.
I am greatly obliged to you, Mr. Charville, for communicating to me, through Sir Level, your intention respecting this house and lands. 

CHARVILLE.
You have a right to be first informed of it. 


CRAFTON bowing. 

I shall be most happy to become the purchaser at what has been considered by competent judges as a reasonable price. 

CHARVILLE.
This estate is a more desirable purchase to you, Mr. Crafton, than to any other man. 

CRAFTON.
? I have, it is true, sentiments of affection for it, the old home of my forefathers, but I am not rich enough to indulge them to the injury of a moderate fortune. 

CHARVILLE.
Sir, I ask no more, if we can agree upon what really is a reasonable price. I should not wish to exact exorbitantly from the amiable and tender feelings of your nature. 


SIR LEVEL aside to Charville . 

Pshaw! you may make him pay for all those amply enough, and take but little out of his pocket. 


   

Enter Mrs. Charville. 


MRS. CHARVILLE.
Good day, Mr. Crafton. 

CRAFTON.
And to you, Madam, this and many good days. 


CHARVILLE to Mrs. Charville . 

We meet upon business 
turning to Crafton . 
Let your agent and mine, Mr. Crafton, meet together, and--- 


MRS. CHARVILLE drawing her husband aside. 

Are you wrong in the head to part with this house so suddenly, so unadvisedly? 


CHARVILLE aside sarcastically. 

Ay, you advise me to keep it, I suppose; you have your tender feelings too, and partiality for the dear place 
turning indignantly from her to Crafton . 
The place is yours, Sir, if our men of business can agree upon the terms, and I make no doubt they will. 


SIR LEVEL pulling him aside. 

Rash, very rash to say so: he'll cozen your ? poor attorney, depend upon it. 


CHARVILLE turning again to Crafton . 

That is to say, Mr. Crafton, if after examining their report, I myself approve. 


MRS. CHARVILLE pulling him again aside. 

Do not be angry with me for interfering; but where will you find such a pleasant residence? 


   



CHARVILLE as before. 

Ay, Madam, and such pleasant---very pleasant neighbours. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
What do you mean? 

CHARVILLE.
O you cannot possibly divine. 
Turning to Crafton . 
Sir, let the business be settled as soon as you please. You shall have it at the price which you formerly offered. 


SIR LEVEL pulling him aside as before. 

He laughs in his sleeve at your rashness. I see too well by the smile on his face that he thinks he has jockied you. 


CHARVILLE turning to Crafton . 

I mean with reasonable expedition; I am by no means in any particular haste. 


MRS. CHARVILLE going up coaxingly to Crafton as he is about to reply to Charville . 

Nay nay, my dear Sir; you must not tempt him: come to my dressing room, and let Mary and I have a few words with you. You must positively say nothing more to Mr. Charville on this business to-day. It is too bright, too pleasant a day for such ungracious dealings. Come with me, my dear Sir. You must not--- you can't refuse me. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit leading off Crafton . 


   



CHARVILLE looking after them. 

? Yes, she will lead him as she pleases. How coaxingly, how bewitchingly she speaks to him! Ah, how it once bewitched me! she is speaking so close to his face, to the old, withered, hateful visage of Crafton---is she thus with every man? is she altogether shameless? Oh, oh, oh! this is not to be endured. 


SIR LEVEL returning from the other end of the room. 

It is provoking enough; I'm sure. 

CHARVILLE.
Ha! you are here: I thought you were--- Yes, I have been really provoked; for he seems indifferent, and I don't know how, in this business. 

SIR LEVEL.
He wants to buy the estate as a profitable speculation: he despises our improvements; he even laughs at my plan, and holds taste itself in derision.---Look here; I spread it out before him--- 

CHARVILLE.
Well, well; another time if you please: not now, I pray 
putting it away with his hand. 

SIR LEVEL.
But do me the favour only to observe---stone-headed fellow! He would let the savage brushwood 

   

remain in the forest, and I'll be hanged if he would not plant all my smooth shaven slopes with potatoes. 

CHARVILLE.
Let him plant them with nettles and worm-wood, ? an he will. 

SIR LEVEL.
Your servant, Sir: I beg pardon; I intrude, I find.--- 
Aside, as he retires. 
There are nettles and wormwood planted somewhere, that I was not aware of. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 


CHARVILLE alone, pacing up and down in a perturbed manner. 

Ay, ay, it is very plain, it is too plain, it is shamefully plain. 
Stopping short. 
Mighty fond of this residence of a sudden. To be sure, where will she find another house so convenient, with back stairs, and panelled doors, and haunted chambers, and so many cursed conveniences? 
After pacing up and down as before. 
Because I did not find him, I did not see what was before my face as plainly as my hand, and, forsooth, it was Smitchenstault. O woman, woman! thy mysteries of cunning and contrivance! thou would'st deceive man as the evil one deceives thee. But it shall not be.---What can I do? This torment of my mind; this disgrace on my state I can disclose to no one. This cursed world is no place for a man like me to 

   

live in: would I were out of it!---O woman, woman! 
Enter Isaac . 

What do you want? 

ISAAC.
Please your honour, you are wanted in the ? justice chamber. 

CHARVILLE.
What's the matter? 

ISAAC.
Goody Bullock is come to swear the peace against her husband: he has beaten her all black and blue. 

CHARVILLE.
And he has served her right. Let him beat her black and yellow next time. 

ISAAC.
Why, please your honour, she is a good peaceable woman. 

CHARVILLE.
Out, fool! she is a hypocrite, and a liar, and a jade. Let him beat her all the colours of the rainbow, an he will. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 


ISAAC looking after him in a bewildered astonishment. 

He's surely bereft of his wits altogether. To call poor old Goody Bullock all them bad names, 

   

goes to church every Sunday, with her stuff cloak over her arm, and knits hose for the vicar! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

SCENE IV. 

A Summer Parlour, with a Door opening to the Garden. 

Enter Mary and Sir Robert Freemantle from the garden. 



MARY speaking as they enter. 

And your uncle is bent upon purchasing this place. 

FREEMANTLE.
He was born in this house. 

MARY.
It is natural that he should wish to possess it; yet I am sorry for it. I have an affection for it too, and so had my brother; but he has taken some capricious dislike to it, I don't know how. --- 
a pause. 
And you leave us so soon? 

FREEMANTLE.
I feel, my dear Miss Charville, that it is right I should. 

MARY.
How can that be? 

FREEMANTLE.
Have you not perceived your brother's growing dislike to me? 


   


MARY.
He is of late more ungracious to us all; but I must confess I have perceived something of what you say. 

FREEMANTLE.
I perceive it whenever I come near him, in every gesture of his body, in every glance of his eye. I perceive too well that he has discovered my secret, and disapproves, more strongly than I had apprehended, my attachment to you. 

MARY.
His mind is sometimes warped; he does not always judge fairly. 

FREEMANTLE.
My precaution in paying my chief attentions ? to your sister-in-law, which, by my uncle's advice, I have practised, that I might not provoke him to discard me till a favourable turn in my affairs, then daily looked for, should entitle me to declare myself, and, I will also own, to engage Mrs. Charville more heartily in my interest,--- all this precaution has been in vain; and I find that my own undirected, incautious conduct would have been the more successful of the two: at least, I am sure it could not have been less so. 

MARY.
Then pursue it, now, and retrieve your error. 


   


FREEMANTLE.
That you permit me to do so, makes me a proud and a happy man. But you forget, my dear Mary, what I told you half an hour ago. 

MARY.
What was it? I ought not to be so forgetful. 

FREEMANTLE.
That the papers wanting to establish my right to the Shropshire estate, which my attorney has been searching for amongst our old family records, cannot be found. The letter I received from him this morning informs me, that he now despairs of finding them; and this being the case, I must despair of ever obtaining your brother's consent to our union. 

MARY.
Despair is a strong expression. 

FREEMANTLE.
? But is it not a just one? I have not now the face, poor as I am, and poor as I shall probably remain, to propose myself as a match for you. 

MARY.
Well then, Sir Robert, what makes you timid makes me bold. Have the constancy to wait till I am twenty-five: three years will bring this to pass; and then, if you still think me worth the having, and do not consider me as altogether 

   

antiquated, I am yours. My fortune will then be in my own power, independently of my brother's consent. 

FREEMANTLE.
Is it possible that I am so happy? How frank, how noble! But should I take advantage of a sudden impulse of thy generous nature?--- Alas! I should be more virtuous than I feel I am. My uncle has offered to settle his very moderate fortune upon me: but in this case, my sister would be scantily provided for, and our poor cousin, who has ruined himself at the gaming-table, would be entirely destitute. I have therefore refused it. 

MARY.
You have done right, and this refusal gives you a value in my estimation beyond any acquisition of fortune. 
Noise without. 
We shall be ? interrupted here. 

FREEMANTLE.
Let us return to the garden. My formidable rival, Mr. Smitchenstault, must, by this time, have left it. 

MARY.
And I don't think he observed us as we fled from him. He was only passing on to his favourite haunt. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt into the garden. 


   


ACT V. 

SCENE I. 

---A Grove of Trees, with a tangled Thicket in the Back-ground. Charville is discovered pacing to and fro, in a disturbed Manner, Smitchenstault peeping behind him, through the Bushes. 



CHARVILLE after muttering to himself confusedly. 

A cloak! a convenience! a provider for disorderly passion!---Noosed for this purpose! Her cunning, her witchery, her wickedness--- who could have imagined it? 
After a pause. 
Gain her affections from me! Are his person, his manners, his intellects superior to mine? It is not so: comparison has not produced it. Any man might have had her who happened to come in her way with baseness enough to attempt it.---What can I do? There is no corroborated proof: the world would laugh me to scorn.--- Oh, it is ever thus! Would I had done with this envious, malicious world!---Ha! 


SMITCHENSTAULT coming forward. 

Don't start, my dear frent; I know all dat you do tink, and I am your frent. 


   


CHARVILLE.
I have disclosed my thoughts to no one. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Your tongue has not; but when you come to my room secretly to ask of me if it was really Sir Robert dat I did see pass trough dat chamber, and when I tell you dat mine own two eyes do see him, your eyes, your visage, your body, your limb, every ting dat you have, speak for de tongue, and tell me dat you love no Sir Robert in de house wid your wife. 


CHARVILLE starting away from him. 

? I cannot live and bear it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 


SMITCHENSTAULT alone. 

Not live! Ah if he would be so kind! It would be good ting for me and de dear Mary. He never give consent to our matrimony; if he die, she be free to marry me, and give me de fortune. Very good ting! ay, very good ting. 

Re-enter Charville . 


CHARVILLE.
Forgive me, Smitchenstault; I am a miserable man, and you have discovered it. But tell no creature the disordered state in which you have found me. You are a stranger, and therefore I am the less distressed that you do know my misery; and you say you are my friend. 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
Yes, de true frent; all dat I do for you, I do for myself. Speak to me all dat you tink. 

CHARVILLE.
That is impossible! I am miserable; I live in torture; I wish I were out of this hateful world. Could it be without crime, I would have done with it at once. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
What you call crime? Have you no more reason dat you mind all dat petty superstitions? Very pretty ting, indeed, to live, if you don't like it: who tank you for dat? I am free---I feel dat I am free. I not come here to be unhappy; when I be so, I go away. 

CHARVILLE.
Ay, but where, my friend? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
? To de good sound sleep; to de notting. 

CHARVILLE.
That were an effectual remedy. I am miserable! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
And what oblige you to be so? 

CHARVILLE.
Ha, tempter! Would you have me destroy myself? 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
No! I only wish you not to be miserable. 

CHARVILLE.
How can I be otherwise? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
I teach you. Do you consider now, and do you tink, and do you say to yourself, "Why be I unhappy? I have de bad wife. O very true; oder men have de bad wife also. Dey call me cocklum." What you call de man wid de 
spreading out two of his fingers significantly 
---ay, ay, cuckold. "Very well, oder men---" 


CHARVILLE starting from him. 

I shall run distracted! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Ay; all dis not be pleasant, but it be foolish dat you let it make you miserable. But if you cannot help dis, where is de obligation dat you should bear it? Keep a your place, dey say: foh, foh! de place where I am best is my place. 

CHARVILLE.
If I could but leave them my misery as a legacy behind me! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O you will leave dat to Sir Robert; he will get de bad wife to torment him. 

CHARVILLE.
Marry! Devil choke them! I would live to 

   

? the age of Methuselah rather, were I wretched as wretchedness could make me. Marry! 
tearing his hair extravagantly: 
it makes me mad to think of it. 
Striding rapidly to the bottom of the stage. 


SMITCHENSTAULT aside. 

Foolish wort! I am all wrong here. 


CHARVILLE returning. 

And you think they would marry? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O no, no! I speak de joke: he be too wise to marry her, and den she will say, Oh, oh! and tink of de good husband she had. 

CHARVILLE.
Think of me! Yes, she will then think of me. She must of think of me then. If I could but rend her guilty heart with remorse! If I could make her miserable! 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O no doubt of dat; she will be very miserable, and have de bitter misery. 

CHARVILLE.
Ay, that were something; that were worth dying for. She will think of me then in the agony of repentance. If I could be sure of this, ---be sure. 
A pause of thought. 
But are you a man, and advise me to such a desperate act? 


   


SMITCHENSTAULT.
I am a philosopher, and advise you to notting. But dere is de good reason, if you will hear it; ---de sober, well-considered reasons on bote sides of de question; and I will say dem all over to you in good order. First, dere be--- 


CHARVILLE impatiently. 

? Not now---not now. I am distracted. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 


SMITCHENSTAULT looking after him with disappointment. 

He wont do it, after all, de chicken-heart, for as well as de English love to hang demselves. If he do, I have de sweet Mary, and all her fortune; but if he do not---O I will say it be all a joke dat I did say to him, and den dere will be no more about it. Chick-hearted fellow! 
Starting. 
A noise amongst the bushes! What face is dat peeping through de leaves? Dere is surely no devil in daylight. My flesh creep---foolish fear! it was noting. 
Exit, and presently Sancho comes from the thicket, creeping on hands and feet. 

SANCHO.
Tat talky talky man chace him from tis spot, so convenient for it. But he no escape me. 
Looking carefully round. 
O still in te wood. Yonder he walk. I be near him again presently. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit again into the thicket. 


   


SCENE II. 

A small Glade in the Wood, surrounded with high Fern and Bushes. 

Enter Charville . 



CHARVILLE after walking with hasty disturbed steps to the front of the stage, stops short, and continues musing for some time before he speaks. 

She will think of all this when it is too late: it will embitter her days; she will then bear her torment in secret. She will know I have loved her; she will know it then. The time runs on; it should be done. O that it were done! But the doing of it is a fearful effort. 
Pulls out a pistol, and looks at it ruefully. 
Is there no way of getting rid of this hateful world but by this miserable act of self-destruction? O that some friendly hand would rid me of my wretched life! I cannot do it. 
Throws away the pistol, which Sancho , bursting from the fern, &c. takes up, and runs fiercely at him, presenting it to his head. 

SANCHO.
Me will do it for you, and tank you too. 

CHARVILLE.
Hold, hold! For Heaven's sake spare my life. 


   


SANCHO.
Me spare you! you who ruinated my massa! You kite, you rook; you shall now be food for te rooks! 
Snaps the pistol, which misses fire; then Charville wrests it from him, and they both grapple with one another stoutly, when Sancho being about to get the better of Charville, Sir Robert Freemantle enters, and rescues the latter. 


FREEMANTLE keeping fast hold of Sancho . 

Villain, or desperado! keep still; for I will not quit my hold till thou art in safe custody. 

CHARVILLE.
Brave stranger! How shall I thank---Ha! Freemantle. 
Turning away his head. 

FREEMANTLE.
Did you not know me? But that look of distress and displeasure! What does it mean at such a moment as this? 

CHARVILLE.
Do not inquire. Your own conscience will ? answer your question. What has been your motive for lingering about my house? 

FREEMANTLE.
You have discovered my secret, then, and the sight of me is hateful to you. 

CHARVILLE.
What! you own it: the poor covering of 

   

secrecy is done away; you look in my face and own it. I am degraded even to this. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit distractedly. 


FREEMANTLE still holding Sancho . 

Is he mad? I cannot follow him for this fellow. Ho, help there! Holla, there! 

Enter Crafton . 


CRAFTON.
Ha! is it you, Freemantle? What do you here with that black creature whom you collar so tightly? 

FREEMANTLE.
He would have murdered Charville. See, his pistol is on the ground. 

CRAFTON.
Would you have murdered him, you rascal? 

SANCHO.
Me true man and no rascal. Me rascal if me not kill te base cruel rook dat ruinated my massa. 

CRAFTON.
Why, Sancho, my old friend Sancho, is it you? 

SANCHO.
Me no your frien. You cruel to my massa. 

CRAFTON.
Nay, nay, be pacified, faithful Sancho. I am 

   

a better friend to thy master than he is to himself, and I will prove it. He shan't remain long in prison: be pacified.--- 
To Freemantle . 
? Let him go: I'll be his warrant that he shall follow us quietly to the house.---Wont you, Sancho? 

SANCHO.
Me not promise. 

CRAFTON.
But I will trust you without a promise. 

FREEMANTLE.
Be it so, then; but he must not have the pistol again. 
Lets go his hold, while Crafton takes the pistol from the ground. 

CRAFTON.
But where is Charville? Let us go to him. 

FREEMANTLE.
I cannot. He knows my secret, and is so sternly offended, it is impossible for me to speak to him in his present unaccountable frenzy. 

CRAFTON.
Never mind that. Come along; here is a letter that will make you stand firmly before him. 


FREEMANTLE snatching the letter. 

The long lost papers are found. 


   


CRAFTON.
Even so; read it as we go.---Come along, Sancho. Thy master will be the better for it too; he will soon be a free man again. 

SANCHO.
You say tat,---you sure of tat,---you swear tat? 

CRAFTON.
Yes, yes; I'll say it and swear it too, if thou wilt not take my word for it. 

SANCHO.
O good Massa Crafton! me tank you, me embrace you, me kneel to you. 


CRAFTON raising him. 

Fy, fy, fy! Let no man be on his knees but ? when he is at his prayers. Come with us and fear nothing; though this was a desperate attempt, a very wicked attempt against the laws of the land. 

SANCHO.
Me care for te laws when te laws care for me. 

CRAFTON.
Well, well, come with us. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE III. 

A Library. Enter Charville , in violent Agitation, followed by Mrs. Charville and Mary . 



CHARVILLE speaking as he enters to Mrs. Charville . 

No, madam; do not follow me; it is in vain to explain it. The secret is out---the guilty secret is out: he has had the boldness to acknowledge it himself---to acknowledge to my face. I am such a creature now as he need no longer keep measures with. Away, perverted woman! Do you follow me still? Do you look me in the face? 
Beating his forehead. 
He acknowledged it himself. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Acknowledged it? 

CHARVILLE.
Yes, madam. You disdained explanation, forsooth. Your virtuous pride was offended, and since I employed disguise in the matter, I must find it out myself. I have found it out, madam; he confessed it himself. 

MARY.
My dear brother, what was it he did confess? 

CHARVILLE.
Art thou a fool? Canst thou not comprehend? 

   

That woman there, whom thou callest thy sister, ---thy amiable sister,---that woman whom I married,---that woman whom I loved better than myself. 

MARY.
Nay, that is a mistake of yours, brother; for if you had loved any thing better than yourself, you would never have been in this condition. ? Your closeness and self-love have made you always suspicious. I thought, indeed, that a wife of her cheerful temper would have enlarged your heart, and--- 

CHARVILLE.
Hold thy tongue, simpleton; she has enlarged my head. 
Stamping with his feet, and beating his forehead. 
The whole world must know it now. Since he brazens it out himself, the shame is public. I shall be known to be--- 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Nothing but a fool, and that you must submit to, being a distinction which you have taken so much pains to acquire. 

CHARVILLE.
O woman, woman! thy audacity is amazing. 

Enter Crafton and Sir Robert Freemantle . 


CRAFTON.
Excuse this intrusion, Mr. Charville. I bring a culprit in my hand, who fears he has offended you. 


   


CHARVILLE.
O most courtly phrase! That black villain who would have murdered me, he fears, too, I suppose, that he has offended me.---Sir Robert, you have saved my life, and I cannot turn you out of my house; but you have made that life hateful to me, and I hate it the more for being preserved by you. 

CRAFTON.
Be more calm, my good sir. He has, indeed, gained the lady's affections unknown to you, and--- 

CHARVILLE.
? And may take her and her affections also, and the devil give them his benediction. 

CRAFTON.
Well, Freemantle, e'en take the lady as she is offered to you, though it be not in the most gracious manner. Fortune is no object now; take her and marry her out of hand. 

FREEMANTLE.
I cannot follow more pleasing advice. 

CHARVILLE.
Marry her without a divorce! I'll not divorce her. I'll be hanged if I give her up to any man alive. 

CRAFTON.
Pray, good Sir, turn your eyes upon the 

   

party. I believe this match, which my nephew has so long desired, may be accomplished without a divorce. 


CHARVILLE turning round and seeing Sir Robert with Mary 's hand in his. 

My sister! you bewilder me.---Where is my wife? 

CRAFTON.
Most dutifully employed laughing at you in her sleeve at the other corner of the room. 


MRS. CHARVILLE advancing. 

My dear Charles, I told you you would prove a fool at last. 

CHARVILLE.
But, Madam, you have not yet proved it.--- Sister, let go that man's hand, and answer me a question. How long is it since he first paid his addresses to you? 

MARY.
His addresses have been short, but I have ? reason to believe he has been attached to me since we first met, some months ago, in Shropshire. 

CHARVILLE.
And I have reason to believe he has made thee a mere cat's paw of convenience, silly girl! --- 
Turning to Freemantle . 
Let me ask you, Sir, why, in my family, your marked attentions 

   

were paid to that lady? 
pointing to Mrs. Charville . 

FREEMANTLE.
My dear uncle, you must answer this question. 

CRAFTON.
Then, frankly and honestly, I'll tell you the whole truth, which, in its full extent, even Freemantle himself is ignorant of. I counselled him to pay his chief attentions to Mrs. Charville, to conceal from you his design upon your sister, lest you should forbid him your house, and blast all his pretensions in the bud, being then ill entitled to propose himself as a suitor. And besides this--- 

CHARVILLE.
Why do you hesitate? Proceed. You will make your tale hang together, some way or other, I suppose. 

CRAFTON.
Besides, I thought it might engage Mrs. Charville ---pardon me, Madam, you were a stranger to me, and I had heard that you were fond of such attentions,---engage her to plead with you in his behalf. 

CHARVILLE.
? And this is your story? A simple plot, truly, for a simple man to listen to. 


   


CRAFTON.
This is all my plot or story as Freemantle is privy to it; but there was another part of it concealed in my own breast, which shall be so no longer. I hoped that by making you jealous of his visits here to incline you to leave my neighbourhood, and restore to me at a reasonable price the possession of my forefathers. This sinister design has failed---deservedly failed---for I do not justify it; and now you have my sincere confession without reserve. I am sorry for the pain and trouble I have occasioned: can you forgive me, Charville? 

CHARVILLE.
I will try to do it. I'm glad you have not got the manor though.--- 
To Mrs. Charville . 
And can you forgive me? 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
I'll try to do it; and if you are very good, and very penitent, and less suspicious, and less teasing, and more docile, and more obliging, I make no doubt but I shall succeed. 

CHARVILLE.
So I find I have a great many changes to make. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Yes, Mr. Charville; and in return I'll make some too. I'll be grave, orderly, and demure ? before all men, smiling only on mine own wedded 

   

lord, when he encourages me to do so; three times in a week, perhaps, or oftener, as it may chance. I'll not whisper in the ear of my first cousin, unless he be blear-eyed, or have a hump on his back; and I'll neither go to grove, arbour, nor closet, till I have sent you before me to see that there be nobody there. 

CHARVILLE.
Harriet, Harriet! I thought this would have moved you differently. You triumph, no doubt; but less exultation, and more candour, would surely have been as becoming. If I am more suspicious than other men---I am not aware that I am so---you must at least acknowledge that it was an extraordinary circumstance to have an honourable suitor to a young lady concealed in a family, and making his way through private doors, and by private stairs, to apartments which she did not occupy. This is no chimera of my brain, Madam; Mr. Smitchenstault saw it. 

MARY.
I believe, brother, all that you really know of the matter is that Smitchenstault said so. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
But here he comes; and if he says so again, when confronted with Smoothly, we shall yield that point to you entirely. 

   

Enter Smitchenstault . 

? Mr. Smitchenstault, do you seriously aver that you saw Sir Robert Freemantle pass through the haunted chamber while you were in hiding there? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
Madam, I have eyes in my head; I see what I do see, and I know what I do see. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
We don't doubt that in the least; but did you actually see a man pass? and was it this identical man? 
pointing to Freemantle . 

CHARVILLE.
Answer me, Sir, did you see this man pass through the chamber? 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
In de imaginations I see one man very like dat man. 

CHARVILLE.
In the imaginations! Then you have not really seen it, and you have told me an untruth. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
What you call false? What you call true? De imaginations is all dat we do know: de veritable real true is a foolish notion---is a notting. In mine imaginations I see Sir Robert, and if in imaginations he was not dere, what can I help dat? 


   


CHARVILLE.
Sir, go out of my house, and never enter it again, as long as you live. 

CRAFTON.
Unless it be in imaginations, Mr. Smitchenstault. 


SMITCHENSTAULT to Charville . 

My good Sir, you are in de passion: dere be no good reason in dat. Be not in de passion: ? de sweet Mary will plead for me. 

MARY.
Not I, Mr. Smitchenstault. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
What! you wish me to leave dis house? Ha! you only deceive; you be ashamed to own de tender toughts of your heart. You not wish me gone. It was your sweet looks dat keep me here so long. 

MARY.
With the help of your imaginations. 

CHARVILLE.
Out of my house, wriggling deceiver! 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Don't press him to go so immediately; for Mrs. Smoothly has some matters to settle with him before he leave the house. 

SMITCHENSTAULT.
O devil! I not wait for dat. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit hastily. 


   


CRAFTON.
Now, Mr. Charville, this point being settled, let me crave your pardon for a poor criminal in custody below: he is a faithful servant to an unfortunate master. 

CHARVILLE.
Speak no more of it: my heart has often smote me on that subject. I have renounced the gaming-table for ever, and I restore to poor Henry all I have won from him, though it was, by every rule of honourable play, fairly won. 

CRAFTON.
I believe so, entirely. But I wish the rules of honour came a little nearer to the good Bible precept, "Think not of your own matters, but ? think also every one of his neighbour's." You risked a small part of your ample fortune against the whole of poor Henry's, and you took it from him. However, in restoring it, you do what has seldom been done by men of honour; and, on the part of my thoughtless relation, I gratefully receive your generosity. 


MARY after a pause. 

Charles, you look melancholy; what are you thinking of? 

CHARVILLE.
What I never suspected before---that I have been a very selfish fellow.---Mr. Crafton, I know that this estate was purchased by my family at 

   

an unfair price. I return it to you for the sum which was given for it. 

CRAFTON.
No, Sir; after the indirect means I have used to wrest it from you, I feel that I do not deserve it. I too have been a selfish fellow. 

MRS. CHARVILLE.
Nay, if you come to confessions, I must speak also; I have been a careless, thoughtless, vain and giddy wife. 

CHARVILLE.
I forgive thee, Harriet; and though I cannot own entirely that character of suspicion which you would all so decidedly fasten upon me, yet I will freely confess--- 

CRAFTON.
Have done with confessions. We shall all be ? wiser, and, I hope, better, for what has just passed, and therefore have no cause to regret it. 

____________________________________________________________


ENTHUSIASM: A COMEDY. IN THREE ACTS.
 
Front matter  PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Lord Worrymore.
Colonel Frankland.
Blount.
Sir John Crofton.
Clermont.
Hugh, a Boy.
Paterson, Servant of Colonel Frankland.
Manhaunslet, a German Vagrant.
Visiters, Servants, &c.
WOMEN. Lady Worrymore.
Lady Shrewdly.
Miss Frankland.
Mrs. Brown.
Barbara, the Attendant of Miss Frankland.
Visiters, Servants, &c.

 
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. —A Saloon, with a Glass Door opening into a Garden in the bottom of the Stage. — Lord Worrymore and Lady Shrewdly are seen walking towards the House in earnest conversation, and enter by the said Door, speaking as they enter. LADY SHREWDLY. But, my dear Lord Worrymore, did you not know all this before you married her? and did you not admire the charming ardour of her character?
LORD WORRYMORE. Yes, Madam; for things worthy of that ardour did then engage her attention. The first time I beheld her,—I believe I have told you before.

 
LADY SHREWDLY. True, my Lord; I have heard you say that the first time you beheld her was in the painting gallery of Mr. Rougeit, where she stood rivetted with admiration before the portrait of your Lordship; and that grace and expression attracted her at that moment, I am not disposed to question.
LORD WORRYMORE. Yes, my dear friend; and in poetry also, and the graver works of composition, nothing that was excellent escaped her. My speech upon the former Corn Bill delighted her: not an argument or happy expression in the whole that she could not repeat with a spirit and action appropriate. She had a sound taste for eloquence; nobody admired it like her.
LADY SHREWDLY. How should they? She must have had a capacity made on purpose to admire that speech;    and a very rare one too, I assure you.
LORD WORRYMORE. Not a word or observation fell from my lips, but she understood the sense and spirit of it so quickly.
LADY SHREWDLY. Leaving any other listener far behind, I dare say.

 
LORD WORRYMORE. And now, every learned oddity, every foolish coxcomb who has gathered up in the world but a shred of reputation for any thing, engrosses exclusively, for the time, her thoughts and admiration; and what I do, what I speak, what I write, is no more attended to, than if I had changed into a common-place person on her hands.
LADY SHREWDLY. And that is what change could never make your Lordship.
LORD WORRYMORE bowing with affected modesty. To be sure, I then thought enthusiasm a very charming quality.
LADY SHREWDLY. But not very constant to its object, my Lord; you surely could not think that. You have had your turn, and should now with a better grace give up some portion of her admiration to the other sages, orators, and poets with which this happy metropolis abounds.
LORD WORRYMORE. Sages, orators, and poets, Lady Shrewdly!    She has been tearing the clothes off her back in squeezing through the crowd of a city conventicle, to hear the long-winded sermons of a presbyterian
 
parson. She has knocked up two sets of horses driving over the town after Italian improvisatori and German philosophers. Her boudoir is studded round with skulls like a charnel-house; and bold dirty creatures from St. Giles come into her very dressing-room, with their ricketty brats in their arms, to put their large mis-shapen heads under her inspection, as the future mighty geniuses of the land. Speaking birds, giraffes, and lectures upon Shakspeare have followed one another in succession, to say nothing of her present little imp of a juggler; and all in their turn are the sole occupiers of her ardent admiration. What a change! what a change for me! With my poor deceased Magdalene how different it was!
LADY SHREWDLY. To be sure, in the first Lady Worrymore's time it was very different; but you compared her, not long ago, to a dull foggy day in November, and the present to a bright morning in spring.
LORD WORRYMORE. So I did, so I did, my good cousin; but there    are bright mornings in spring, when the wind blows from every point of the compass in the course of ten minutes, bringing sand, dust, and straws from every lane and corner, to blind one's
 
poor eyes and annoy one. I am a miserable man! What can be done to reclaim her?
LADY SHREWDLY. Very little, I believe.
LORD WORRYMORE. Oh, oh!
LADY SHREWDLY. But do not despair; she may get tired of this hurricane of enthusiasm, after two or three tricks have been played upon her credulity.
LORD WORRYMORE. You think so.
LADY SHREWDLY. And it would not, perhaps, be amiss for you to lie by for a time, and make no more attempts to bring back her attention to your own merits. Or if you cannot forbear doing so, do it covertly.
LORD WORRYMORE. How covertly?
LADY SHREWDLY. Write another eloquent speech upon some approaching Parliamentary question, and let it be submitted to her criticism, as the composition of some young Irish orator of amazing genius, who has hitherto, from modesty, given silent votes in the house, and you will see how prodigiously she will be struck with the depth, the
 
force, the brilliancy of the dear, delightful oration.
LORD WORRYMORE.    Now, my dear good cousin, are you serious?
LADY SHREWDLY. Serious or not, I can think of nothing so likely to serve your ends, under the present untoward circumstances. But somebody is coming. Enter Blount. O, 'tis a gay young sailor returned from a three years' station in the Mediterranean.—You're welcome, dear Frank! let me see you as often as you can while you remain in town; it always gives me pleasure. Permit me to present Mr. Francis Blount to your Lordship: the son of an old friend and schoolfellow of mine.
LORD WORRYMORE. I am glad to have the honour of meeting any friend of yours; and hope he has returned safe and sound from the sabres of the Greek pirates.
BLOUNT. I boast of no honourable scars as yet, my Lord.
LORD WORRYMORE. All in good time, young gentleman.

 
BLOUNT. Has your Ladyship any commands for Herefordshire?
LADY SHREWDLY. Are you going so soon?
BLOUNT. In a few days, I believe.
LADY SHREWDLY. What takes you there so soon? Your native place is changed since you left it; scarcely a family remains of the old set.
BLOUNT. Nay; my good aunt Hammond still holds her state in the old mansion-house, and Squire    Gozling, with his pretty daughter, I suppose, is there still.
 Lady Shrewdly frowns to him significantly. LORD WORRYMORE smiling. You will find your bird flown from that nest, I believe.
BLOUNT. Is little Kate married?
LADY SHREWDLY. No, she is not; but Arabella—
BLOUNT. O, as to her, she is welcome to marry for me,
 
as soon as she can find any wiseacre to have her.
LADY SHREWDLY who has been frowning and making faces to him behind Lord Worrymore's back, but in vain. Out upon thee, Frank, for a very spiteful creature! Thou hast paid thy devoirs to her, I dare say, and she has scorned such a stripling as thou wert at that time.
BLOUNT. My devoirs, to a dull formal prude, who spoke two words in half a day, and those uttered as slowly and deliberately as if she were reading them from the spelling-book!
LADY SHREWDLY. We must be at cross purposes now, surely; we are not speaking of the same lady.
LORD WORRYMORE. Don't mind it, Lady Shrewdly; it is clearly a mistake, and is of no consequence whatever.— I wish you good morning. Good morning, Sir.
                                         Exit. LADY SHREWDLY. O Francis Blount! what hast thou done?
BLOUNT. Nothing very bad, I hope.

 
LADY SHREWDLY. Didst thou not see me making faces to thee    to stop thy foolish tongue?
BLOUNT. And how was I to know what all those grimaces were meant for, when ladies, now-a-days, twist their features all manner of ways, as I am told, for the sake of expression?
LADY SHREWDLY. Arabella Gozling, whom thou hast made so free with, is now the wife of Lord Worrymore, and a peeress of England.
BLOUNT holding up his hands, and laughing heartily. Every man to his own fancy! This good peer must have admired her as the most prudent piece of still life that ever wore mantua and petticoat.
LADY SHREWDLY. Quite wrong again, friend; he married her as a high-toned, ardent enthusiast.
BLOUNT. When my grandmother links herself to a third husband, I may believe that he marries her as a round, dimpled Hebe of fifteen. An imaginative ardent enthusiast! How could the creature so transmogrify herself? ay, or think of such a change?

 
LADY SHREWDLY. That, it must be owned, is difficult to explain.
BLOUNT. O, now I have it! She became tired of sitting in the corner unnoticed, and has heard no doubt of some lady captivating every heart by her lively and generous enthusiasm; so she has    rushed from her tackle of footstools and decorum, like a brig cut from the stocks, and set herself afloat on the ocean of fashion. By my faith, and she has made a good cruise of it too!
LADY SHREWDLY. Perhaps your conjecture is not far from the truth.
BLOUNT. How came this goose of a lord to be taken in by it?
LADY SHREWDLY. By that which has taken in many, both lords and commoners, ere now;—his own obtrusive eagerness for praise, which had tired out everybody.
BLOUNT. And received this new stream of flattery like rain upon the parched sands of Araby.
LADY SHREWDLY. Even so: to say nothing of a wife lately dead, who would never say one civil thing of all the
 
clever writings that his persevering talents produced.
BLOUNT. He must be a happy dog now, I think: up in the seventh heaven.
LADY SHREWDLY. Nay, nay! fallen from that exaltation deplorably. And if thou hast a mind, I'll engage thee in a plot to restore the poor man to some part of his lost felicity, and mortify his affected spouse at the same time. Canst thou put a Brutus-wig on thy head, and become a great orator for a season?
BLOUNT.    Can I not? I have danced upon deck, ere now, with a turban on my head, as a sultana of the royal harem.
LADY SHREWDLY. Come, then; thou art just the man I want. Let us go to my closet, where we may concert the whole matter without interruption.                                          As they are going off, he stops and laughs heartily. What tickles your fancy so? Don't stop here.
BLOUNT. Methinks she is now before my eyes, this same ardent peeress who makes such commotion
 
amongst you, seated on a high-legged drawing-room chair, the back of which she would not have touched on any account, for the ruffling of her pinched frill and collar. And when you showed her a butterfly or flower from the garden, and said, “Is not that beautiful?” she would draw herself up most precisely, and say, “I believe it is considered so.” Laughing again.
LADY SHREWDLY. Move on, foolish boy.
BLOUNT. She would not give her opinion, but with prudent reserve, on the merits of a beetle or a cock-chafer.
LADY SHREWDLY. Go, go!
BLOUNT. And that too was affectation; for she was a careless hoyden first of all, and took to sense and preciseness afterwards.
LADY SHREWDLY. Move on, I say. We are losing time here,    and may be prevented.
                                         Exeunt, she pushing him gently off the Stage, and he still continuing to laugh.
 
SCENE II. Colonel Frankland's House. Enter Clermont, looking round as if disappointed. CLERMONT. No, she is not here. She is with her uncle, I suppose, reading to him some dull book or other —the Sportsman's Guide, or the plans of Marlborough's battles, as cheerfully and contentedly as if it were the most interesting story or poem that ever was written. Enter Miss Frankland. I have interrupted some pleasant reading, I'm afraid.
MISS FRANKLAND. Not at all: we have got to the end of our battles, and he is now teaching me to play chess.
CLERMONT. I have brought you a book that will delight you.
MISS FRANKLAND. Are you sure of that? I am no great admirer
 
of poetry,—of what is called sentimental poetry, at least.
CLERMONT. Did you not like my friend's sonnets, which I brought you yesterday?
MISS FRANKLAND. O dear, no! I did not understand them.
CLERMONT. Surely some of the thoughts they express are beautiful and tender.
MISS FRANKLAND. I dare say they are; but why should beautiful thoughts be cramped up in such patterned shapes of versification,—all rule and difficulty? I have neither ear for the measure, nor quickness    of comprehension for the meaning.
CLERMONT. Don't say so, Fanny. Neither ear nor comprehension are in fault with you.—I should rather fear—I should rather say—No matter!
MISS FRANKLAND. What would you say?
CLERMONT. Nothing.
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, a blush passes over your face. Were any of those sonnets written by yourself?

 
CLERMONT. Not one of them, I assure you. I wish some of them were.
MISS FRANKLAND. Now I'm sure you have been writing something of the kind. I see it in your face.
CLERMONT. Well, then, since you guess so quickly, I confess that I have; but it shall never be put into your hands.
MISS FRANKLAND. O, do let me see it, Clermont! Give it me now.
CLERMONT. I have it not about me.
MISS FRANKLAND. Has any body seen it?
CLERMONT. Only one imprudent friend, who has mentioned it to Lady Worrymore.
MISS FRANKLAND. I'm sorry for it.
CLERMONT. Is it a great misfortune, that you should look so grave upon it? May I request to know—

 
MISS FRANKLAND. Say nothing more about it: there is company    at hand.
Enter Sir John Crofton. SIR JOHN. But not disagreeable company, I hope. If it be so, tell me frankly looking significantly at them both, and I will retire.
CLERMONT. You are too well aware, Sir John, that your company is always agreeable.
MISS FRANKLAND. In this house I am sure it is.—And you arrive at a lucky moment, too; for I hear Lady Worrymore coming. Enter Lady Worrymore. Good morning, Lady Worrymore: how kind you are to call upon me, occupied as you are with so many objects of interest.
LADY WORRYMORE. Don't speak to me, dear creature.
SIR JOHN to Lady Worrymore . May I presume to say how—
LADY WORRYMORE. Don't speak to me, Sir John; where is pen
 
and paper? Running to a writing-table. I must write immediately; I have been prevented by a hurry of engagements all the morning. Sits down and writes very fast, speaking to them at the same time. The sweet, heavenly creature! it is two long hours since I heard of him.
SIR JOHN aside to Miss Frankland . The juggling boy, I suppose, who is sick with eating plum cake.
LADY WORRYMORE still writing as before. The dear little darling! and he leans his aching head on the pillow—with such languid softness—the 'kerchief twisted round it, too—no    model for an artist was ever so beautiful!
SIR JOHN. Your Ladyship must have him painted so; and take care to keep him sick till the picture is finished.
LADY WORRYMORE. Unfeeling savage!
SIR JOHN. A little more cake will do the business.
LADY WORRYMORE. Don't speak to me. Motioning him off with her hand, and muttering aloud as she looks over the note she has finished. Let me know instantly—the
 
health of the suffering angel— every minute particular since I saw him last. Folds it up. Who waits there? Enter a Servant. Give this to my servant; it is for the mistress of the house where Master Munhaunslet lodges. He must go with it immediately, and wait for an answer.
SERVANT taking the note. And bring the answer here, my Lady?
LADY WORRYMORE. Yes.—No; to the exhibition of antiques in Piccadilly. No, no! to the lecture-room of Mr. Clutterbuck; there will be friends there almost as anxious as myself to hear how the little angel does.
SIR JOHN. Mr. Clutterbuck must be a superlative critic, indeed, to attract your Ladyship at so anxious a moment as the present.
LADY WORRYMORE. Have you not heard him? You are incapable    of appreciating two lines of our immortal bard, if you have not attended Mr. Clutterbuck.
SIR JOHN. I am in very truth, then, an ignorant fellow; and so are you, Clermont, I believe.

 
LADY WORRYMORE. Clermont! Have I the pleasure of beholding the writer of that beautiful sonnet, which has been mentioned to me with so much praise?
SIR JOHN presenting Clermont . A poet who will think himself honoured indeed by the notice of such a critic as Lady Worrymore.
LADY WORRYMORE. O no, Sir John! an ardent admirer of the Muses, but no critic.—To what a charming department of poetry, Mr. Clermont, you have devoted your pen! The sonnet!—the refined, the tender, the divine sonnet! O how it purifies and separates the mind from all commonness and meanness of Nature! Methinks the happy spirits in Elysium must converse with one another in sonnets.
SIR JOHN. What a happy time they must have of it, if they do!
CLERMONT. It is a new and bright fancy of your Ladyship's, and never entered my mundane imagination before.
LADY WORRYMORE. Has it not? O, I have worshipped Petrarch,
 
   dreamt of him, repeated in my sleep all his beautiful conceptions, till I have started from my couch in a paroxysm of delight!
SIR JOHN. Ah, Lady Worrymore! you should have lived some centuries earlier, and been the Laura of that impassioned poet yourself.
MISS FRANKLAND aside to Sir John . I wish she had, with all my heart.
LADY WORRYMORE. But I have not yet seen your sweet composition, Mr. Clermont; pray, pray, give it to me! this very moment—O this very moment! I die to peruse it! I am miserable till I see it! it will haunt my thoughts the whole day!
MISS FRANKLAND. Dear Lady Worrymore, will you shame the divine Mr. Clutterbuck's lecture so much as to think of it then?
LADY WORRYMORE. Ah! my dear Miss Frankland, you are too severe: Shakspeare should indeed be paramount to every thing. Dear Shakspeare! dear Petrarch! I doat on them both. Looking at her watch. Bless me! I am behind my time. Adieu, adieu! To Clermont.  And you will send me your sonnet? you will do me that
 
honour? you will confer upon me that infinite obligation? Adieu, adieu!
                                         Exit, hurrying off, and passing Blount without notice, who has entered towards the end of her rhapsody, and drawn himself up by the wall to let her pass. BLOUNT coming forward. It is best to reef one's sails when a hurricane    is abroad.
SIR JOHN. Why did you not speak to her, Blount? She is your old acquaintance.
BLOUNT. I have known a lady called Miss Gozling, in whose presence I have stood undismayed; but I must take to my studies, I trow, before I accost my Lady Worrymore.
SIR JOHN. That is prudent, Frank; you are rather far behind in book-learning.
MISS FRANKLAND glancing at Clermont . And have not yet penned a sonnet, I believe.
BLOUNT. Faith, I don't know a sonnet from a roundelay; but I shall qualify myself to compose both very expertly, before I become a candidate for her favour.

 
SIR JOHN. You look grave, Clermont.
CLERMONT. I confess you seem to me too severe on this lady. The ardour of her character very naturally betrays her into exaggerated expressions; but surely glancing at Miss Frankland  it is preferable to the cold decorum of insensibility or indifference.
BLOUNT. Of course, Clermont, this fine sonnet of yours is to be put into her fair hands.
CLERMONT. I shall put it under cover, and leave it at her door in the evening.
BLOUNT.    It is out of your way; I am sailing on the right tack for that point; give the packet to my charge, and I will leave it at Worrymore House as I pass.
Enter a Servant. SERVANT. Colonel Frankland begs to have the honour of seeing the gentlemen in his dressing-room.
SIR JOHN. Does the gout still confine him up stairs?

 
MISS FRANKLAND. Indeed it does; and it will be charitable in you all to sit with him as long as you can.
                                         Exeunt Sir John, Clermont, and Blount. MISS FRANKLAND alone, after a thoughtful pause. That he should be so taken in!—But is he so?—In some degree, I fear.—Perhaps it is only to vex me. Walking up and down with a hurried step. No, no! he is taken in.—Is he a vain, conceited man, and have I never discovered it till now?—It cannot be: he has read me many compositions of his friends; one of his own, scarcely ever.—Oh, oh! I wish there was not such a thing as a sonnet in the world!
Enter Barbara. BARBARA. The jelly is ready, Madam, that you mean to carry to the sick boy; and the carriage is waiting.
MISS FRANKLAND. I thank you, Barbara, for reminding me. Fetch my scarf, and we'll go.
BARBARA. You're very right, Ma'am, to look after him, for he's a poor peeping chit; and Lady Worrymore, his landlady tells me, will be the death of    him.
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE III. A poor-looking Chamber, with a Sofa near the front of the Stage. Enter Mrs. Brown, with Hugho, whom she leads to the sofa, then lays him along, and spreads a shawl over him, and then takes a note from her pocket. HUGHO. Tank you, good moder. What is dat?
MRS. BROWN. Something to divert you, my dear;—a note from Lady Worrymore.
HUGHO. Someting to torment me.
MRS. BROWN. She is too good to you, indeed.
HUGHO. Not good—not good. I was well; she stuff me wid cream and comfeit, and make me sick, and now she leave me no rest in my sickness.
MRS. BROWN. Don't be disturbed, dear child; she won't
 
come near you to-day. I bade the servant tell his lady not to come.
HUGHO. You speak message to him?
MRS. BROWN. To be sure I did. Lord help me! where was I to find time, and words, and spelling to write her an answer to all the particlers she axed to know about? I just bade him say to her that you were no better, and must not be disturbed.
HUGHO. She will disturb me de more, and call it comfort. O, dat ladies would leave off comforting!
MRS. BROWN. But there is one lady who is good and quiet, I'm sure, and does not torment you.
HUGHO. Ay, der is one, and she be very good.
MRS. BROWN. She sends you what is fit for you to take, and writes no notes at all.
HUGHO.    I will dance, and play cup and ball to her, when I be well, and tell fader, when he returns, to take no money for it.
MRS. BROWN. And will fader do so, think you? It would
 
be no misfortune to thee, poor thing, if he should never return.
Enter Miss Frankland, and steals on tiptoe to the back of the sofa. MISS FRANKLAND speaking softly to Mrs. Brown . He is resting, I see. I have brought the jelly, and will go away. Retiring.
HUGHO. Who dere?
MRS. BROWN. Miss Frankling: but she is going away.
HUGHO. Not go, not go; good Miss Frankling!
                                          Mrs. Brown sets a chair for Miss Frankland by the sofa, and Hugho takes her hand and kisses it. MISS FRANKLAND. Don't speak, Hugho: I go away if you do.
                                         He raises his head, and nods to her without speaking. MRS. BROWN. You start, Madam!
MISS FRANKLAND. That handkerchief round his head gives him a likeness I never observed before.

 
MRS. BROWN. Them wandering foreigners, Madam, have no nightcaps: they are no better than savages in that and many other respects. Pointing to the handkerchief on his head. It is, to be sure, an unchristian-looking rag: I could scarcely bear to let him say his prayers in it.
                                         A loud rap is heard at the street-door. HUGHO starting up in a fright. It is Lady Worrymore.
MISS FRANKLAND. Be quiet, poor child! I'll soon carry her away with me: she sha'n't tease you long.
Enter Lady Worrymore. LADY WORRYMORE running up to the sofa, clasping her hands affectedly, and hanging over him. Lovely darling! O how I grieve to find you    still so ill! What can I do to make you well?
HUGHO. Stay away: dat shall best make me well.
LADY WORRYMORE. Stay away! how can I do so, my angel, when I am so interested—so grieved? Nobody knows how much I grieve for him.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, a good many do, I should think; for you have been grieving all over the town.
LADY WORRYMORE. You little know: how could words express what I have felt for him? Look at the lovely creature! There is soul and beauty in every line of his countenance. Nay, don't frown at me, Hugho: if you are suffering I'll kiss away the pain. Stoops and kisses him vehemently, while he struggles and pushes her off.
MISS FRANKLAND. Do, Lady Worrymore, be quiet. You'll put the poor child into a fever.
LADY WORRYMORE persevering. No, no! I will make him well: he must be well; for I have told Lady Tweedler, and Lady Cockup, and Miss Larden how beautiful he looks in his handkerchief turban; and they are all coming to see him.
HUGHO. O dear, dear! to be so tormented! I wish dat I was dead. Bursting into tears.
MRS. BROWN. Indeed, indeed, my Lady, your kindness is obstrepulous: the poor child will die of it.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. Let me entreat you, Lady Worrymore, to leave    him in peace; and forbid those ladies to come here. He will have a night-cap on his head presently, and then it will neither be worth your while nor theirs to come near him.
LADY WORRYMORE. What a heartless girl you are, Miss Frankland! how unfeeling! A night-cap on that pretty classical head! What would Mr. Palette say? what would our great sculptors say of such a proposal? They would call you a barbarian.
MISS FRANKLAND. Let them call me what they please; we have no right to torment the poor boy with our admiration. Do leave him in peace. See how he is weeping with vexation, and cannot get to sleep.
MRS. BROWN. Which is quite necessary, my Lady, as your Ladyship knows very well. Neither beast nor body can do without sleep, as my good old mistress used to say, and she was a very sensible woman.
LADY WORRYMORE. Well, then, be it so; since even such a creature as this is subject to the necessities of nature.
 
But let me wipe his tears before I leave him, and cover him up close for repose. Wiping his eyes with her pocket handkerchief, and going to arrange the shawl. Bless me! what a covering is this for my darling! Pulling it off, and taking a fine Indian shawl from her shoulders, which she spreads over him.    This is more worthy to enfold such a being; this will keep him better from the cold.—Sweet rest to you, my pretty Hugh! I must tear myself away.
                                         Curtsies slightly to Miss Frankland, and hurries off. MRS. BROWN. She has left him a good shawl, howsomever; it will put a mint of money into his purse, when he has wit enough to dispose of it.
MISS FRANKLAND. You must not reckon upon that too securely.
Re-enter Lady Worrymore, and beckons Mrs. Brown, who goes to her apart. LADY WORRYMORE aside to Mrs. Brown . You need take no trouble about the shawl, you know; for my servant will call for it tomorrow.
                                         Exit hastily. MISS FRANKLAND. Call for it to-morrow! The shawl, I suppose?

 
MRS. BROWN. Yes; deuce take her generosity! kisses and sweet words are cheaper than shawls.
MISS FRANKLAND. I guessed as much; the mint of money won't come from that quarter.—Let us move a little to this corner, if you please. Leads Mrs. Brown away from the sofa, more to the front. What do you know of the man who brought him to England—this Manhaunslet? Do you think he is really his father?
MRS. BROWN. He says he is.
MISS FRANKLAND. Does he behave to him as if he were?
MRS. BROWN. He behaves to him as well as some fathers do to their children; and that is indifferent enough.
MISS FRANKLAND. Poor boy! indifferent enough, I fear.
MRS. BROWN. He had a monkey, when he first came, that    danced on its hind legs, and played quarter-staff and them tricks; and I never knew which of them he liked best, Hugho or the ape: he gave them the same food, the same kind of fondling, and the same education.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. Did you not tell me, a few minutes since, that the boy said his prayers?
MRS. BROWN. True, Madam; but he did so, because I told him he ought to do it, for all good boys did so.
MISS FRANKLAND. Did he pray in the German tongue?
MRS. BROWN. No; God forbid, Madam, that he should speak to his Creator in such a jargon as that!
MISS FRANKLAND. You taught him, then, what to say?
MRS. BROWN. To be sure I did, Madam; for, as I said before, the ape and him had both the same learning from that heathenish vagrant, Manhaunslet.
MISS FRANKLAND. And what has become of the ape?
MRS. BROWN. As soon as little Hugho was so admired by the gentry, as to be sent for to great folk's houses, to show off his balls and his dancing, and all them there pretty motions of his, he understood, somehow or other, that the monkey was not reckoned genteel, and so he sent him on his
 
travels with another outlandish vagrant, to go to country fairs and the like.
MISS FRANKLAND.    But what has become of Manhaunslet?
MRS. BROWN. I don't know, Madam.
MISS FRANKLAND. Did he ever mention his wife to you, or who was Hugho's mother?
MRS. BROWN. No, Madam.
MISS FRANKLAND. Did Hugho ever mention his mother?
MRS. BROWN. No, Madam.
MISS FRANKLAND. I thank you, Mrs. Brown. Take good care of the child. I'll see you soon again. Going to the sofa. He is in a sound sleep now. How strong that likeness is! even sleep seems to add to it.
                                         Exeunt.
 
ACT II. SCENE I. —The House of Colonel Frankland. He enters, with a letter in his hand, leaning on Paterson. Sits down in an easy chair, and sets about arranging books and papers on a table at the bottom of the Stage. COLONEL FRANKLAND after looking at the letter. Let me again consider the request of this gay Baronet. Muttering as he reads. Disinterested attachment—only requests to be allowed to endeavour to gain her good opinion.— Yes, yes! the plea and pretensions of them all. The days of our life wear on, and every pleasant solace, after it has lulled and cheered us for a season, drops away.—I would rather have parted with her to William Clermont; but what course of events is ever fulfilled according to the foresight of our imagination? Speaking in a louder voice, vehemently. None! no, none!
PATERSON advancing from the bottom. What is your pleasure, Sir?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. A thing which I never get, Paterson.

 
PATERSON. I'm sure I do all I can to content your honour.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. So thou dost, my old friend; but thou canst not make Fortune do the same thing. Thou art an old soldier, Paterson, as well as myself: tell me, now, if thou wert ever at siege, battle, or even skirmish, in thy life, wherein every circumstance fell out as the general or commander had reckoned upon?
PATERSON. No, surely, your honour. But what is the    head of a general good for, if it can do nothing but plan, and cannot turn every unforeseen accident that casts up, to the furtherance of his purpose some way or other?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Very true, my friend; and thou art teaching me a lesson without being aware of it.
PATERSON. I were a bold man, indeed, to pretend to do that to your honour knowingly.
COLONEL FRANKLAND sighing deeply. I wish I had had some such teaching ten years ago. But no; I suppose it would have done me no good then.

 
PATERSON. Ay; that was about the time when our young lady—
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Don't speak of that; I can't bear it.
PATERSON. I crave your honour's pardon; I might have known as much. But when you talk cheerily to me, I always, somehow or other, forget myself.
Enter Sir John Crofton, and Paterson retires. COLONEL FRANKLAND. Your servant, Sir John. You are, in the true etiquette of a lover, I see, somewhat before your time.
SIR JOHN. Call it not so, Colonel. What has made it etiquette to all, but the natural haste and ardour of real lovers? and of my pretensions to be considered as one of the last class, I hope in good time to convince you.
COLONEL FRANKLAND.    Convince the lady, Sir John; and if the conviction should please her, I must be content. I will not thwart her inclinations.

 
SIR JOHN. I thank you, my dear Sir, for this ready and hearty acquiescence in the first wish of my heart.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Nay; you rate my acquiescence somewhat beyond its real worth: it is neither ready nor hearty.
SIR JOHN. I am very sorry if my proposals to your niece do in any respect displease you, Colonel Frankland.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. They do me honour, Sir John, and displease me as little as any offer of the kind could have done, with one exception; for I will deal honestly with you.
SIR JOHN. I respect your sincerity, though it gives me the pain of knowing there is one whom you would have preferred to me.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. But it is a preference arising more from the partiality of my own feelings, than from any superior pretensions in the man.
SIR JOHN. I thank you for this candour, and will not conceal from you that I considered Clermont as
 
an acceptable visiter in the family, which has made me hitherto conceal the nature of my feelings    for your charming niece; but, seeing his mind become so suddenly engrossed with the blandishments of Lady Worrymore, I have thought myself at liberty to declare my secret sentiments.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Yes; I have had some intimation of it. Starting from his chair, and walking lamely but rapidly across the floor. Silly noodle!—foolish simpleton!—bewildered ninnyhammer! He had brains in his head once.
SIR JOHN. They are gone a wool-gathering for the present, at least.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And will return with a knotty handful of it for their pains.—O, the senseless gudgeon!
SIR JOHN. Senseless enough, it must be owned. I should have thought—
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Say no more upon this foolish subject.—There is a fair field before you, Sir John: win the lass, if you can, and then I will do my part, and strive to give up my comfort as resignedly as may be.

 
Enter Miss Frankland. SIR JOHN going eagerly up to her. How fortunate I am to see you thus, on the very first conversation I have presumed to hold with your uncle on the subject nearest to my heart! Taking her hand, which she endeavours to pull away.
MISS FRANKLAND. Your fortune, however, will be of short continuance, if my presence is concerned with it;    for I only wished to see my uncle for one moment, as there is a person waiting for me, below stairs, on particular business.
SIR JOHN. Some milliner or shop-woman, I suppose, who can as well return to-morrow.
MISS FRANKLAND. And if it were so, I have no right to waste her time, whatever I may do with my own.— Good morning.
SIR JOHN still endeavouring to detain her. Call it not waste. Nobody rates time so high as those who will go.
MISS FRANKLAND. And nobody rates it so low as those who will not.

 
SIR JOHN. Let us compromise the difference, then. Stay here but one quarter of an hour, and I'll give you my word of honour to go at the end of it.
MISS FRANKLAND. Even that promise cannot detain me.
                                         Exit hastily. COLONEL FRANKLAND. What did the saucy girl say to you just now, when she frowned so?
SIR JOHN conceitedly. O! young ladies' frowns are like dreams, and must be interpreted by contraries.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Not those of Fanny Frankland, however; she frowns not on man, woman, or child, without being really displeased. This looks unpromising, Sir John.
SIR JOHN. Not a whit—not a whit, my dear Colonel.    I have known a man refused by a fair mistress three times in the course of one little month, and married to her at the end of it.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Then let me freely tell you, Sir, that the wooer and the wooed were, in that case, worthy of one another.

 
SIR JOHN. Your irony, my good Sir, is rather too severe. I don't pretend to be romantic; but in the sincerity and disinterestedness of my attachment to Miss Frankland, I hope you will do me the honour and the justice to place confidence.— I now take my leave, and I hope, with your permission, to repeat my visits.
                                         Exit, Colonel Frankland bowing coldly to him. COLONEL FRANKLAND alone. This won't do; no, it won't do.—O that the silly fellow should have allowed himself to be bewildered with the rhapsodies of such a fool as Lady Worrymore! Surely, writing verses must have some power of intoxication in it, and can turn a sensible man into a fool by some process of mental alchemy.—Thank God, I never had any personal experience of the matter!—I once tried to turn a few common expressions of civility into two couplets of metre, to please a dainty lady withal, but it would not do: so I e'en gave it up, and kept the little portion of mother-wit    that Nature had bestowed upon me uninjured. Re-enter Miss Frankland. Art thou here again?
MISS FRANKLAND. I waited till I heard him go away.

 
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And hast returned, with the curiosity of a very woman, to learn what he has been saying to me.
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, the vanity of a very woman has whispered in my ear, and informed me of all that already.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And was it welcome information?
MISS FRANKLAND. Not very.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. He has rank,—a fair character, as young men go in the world, and a moderately good fortune.
MISS FRANKLAND. He has those recommendations.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And is, moreover, free from the follies of poetry.—What sayest thou, then, to such a suitor?
MISS FRANKLAND. As long as you are not tired of me, dear uncle, I will not give up your society for that of any other man. And I feel, my dear Sir,— taking his hand tenderly, —I feel it sensibly and gratefully, that you are not tired of me yet.

 
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Foolish child! tired of the only comfort I have on earth!
MISS FRANKLAND. Let us say no more, then, on this subject.—    I came to speak to you of something else.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And I will listen to thee most willingly.
MISS FRANKLAND with emotion. I thank you—I am going—I would not give you pain—I should not have ventured—
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What is the meaning of all these I's, and would not's, and should not's, and pauses, and pantings?
MISS FRANKLAND. Bear with me a moment. I shall be able to speak coherently by and by.
                                         A pause, during which he looks earnestly in her face. COLONEL FRANKLAND. Well, dear Fanny, what is it?
MISS FRANKLAND in a hurried manner. Are you sure that your daughter left no child behind her?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Quite sure.—I am confident of it.—I have
 
good reason to believe she did not.—Do not put racking thoughts into my head. What has tempted thee to tear open an ill-closed wound?
MISS FRANKLAND. Pardon the pain I give. A strong sense of duty compels me.—You are confident, you say, and on good reasons, that she left no child behind her.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Would not that Italian adventurer have informed a wealthy father-in-law that a child was born, and had survived its mother? Would such a plea for worldly purposes have been neglected? No, there could be no child; and, thank Heaven,    there was none!—What can have put such fancies into thy head?
MISS FRANKLAND. I have seen a child to-day who strongly resembles my cousin.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Thou art too young to have any distinct recollection of her face.
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, but I have: it was so pleasant a face, and she was so good to me.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. It was a pleasant face. If I could remember
 
her as she once was, and forget what she afterwards became, it would be a recollection worth all my wealth to purchase.
MISS FRANKLAND. Should you like to see this child?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. No, no, no! I could not bear it.
MISS FRANKLAND. He shall not, then, be brought to you; but I will often go and look at him myself. You will not be offended with that?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Thou wilt go often to look at him! Is the likeness then so strong?
MISS FRANKLAND. So strong, that in looking on him you would feel that Louisa, or such a woman as Louisa, must have been his mother.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Such a woman, an thou wilt.—What kind of forehead has this child?
MISS FRANKLAND. Somewhat broad and low.
COLONEL FRANKLAND.    And the nose?

 
MISS FRANKLAND. Rather short than long; and the nostrils on either side are curved so prettily, that they look like two little delicate shells.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Is it possible! This was the peculiarity in her face.
MISS FRANKLAND. You droop your head, dear uncle;—you tremble. Let me bring this child to you.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Not now,—not now.
MISS FRANKLAND. But you will, some other time.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Let me have a little respite.—To look on aught like her—like what she was—like the creature that played round my chair—that followed me—that—Out upon thee, Fanny Frankland! thou hast stirred up vain yearnings within me, and when I see him he will not be like her after all.
MISS FRANKLAND. And if he should not be so like as you expected, will you not befriend a poor helpless child, for even a slight resemblance?

 
COLONEL FRANKLAND. I'll do what thou desirest, be it ever so slight.
MISS FRANKLAND. Thanks, dear uncle! Retire and compose yourself awhile. Let me lead you to your own room.
                                         Exeunt, he leaning on her arm. SCENE II. Lady Shrewdly's Garden: the House seen in the side Scene. Enter from a walk, at the bottom of the Stage, Lady Worrymore and Clermont, speaking as they enter. LADY WORRYMORE. And then, again, can any thing be more beautiful than when, looking up to Juliet's window, he exclaims,—

“Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.” O how fine!—You are silent: don't you think so?
CLERMONT. There are many passages in the play which I admire more.

 
LADY WORRYMORE. Nay, surely you admire it: positively you must. I doat upon it; and Mr. Clutterbuck says, no lover could have said any thing of his mistress so exquisitely impassioned—so finely imagined.
CLERMONT. I believe, indeed, no lover would have said any thing like it.
LADY WORRYMORE. And again, which is, perhaps, more exquisite still,—

“Two of the fairest stars in all the heavens,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Which, if her eyes were there, they in her head,
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
   As daylight doth a lamp: her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright,
That birds would sing, and think it were not night!” Is not that impassioned? Is not that sublime?
CLERMONT. I dare not pretend to judge of what is so honoured by your ladyship's approbation. But you have stopped short at the only lines in the whole speech that appear to me, although with some degree of conceit, to express the natural feelings of a lover.
LADY WORRYMORE. Indeed! Repeat them, I pray.

 
CLERMONT.
“O that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!” LADY WORRYMORE in a drawling voice. Yes, to be sure, a common lover might have said something like that.—Mr. Clutterbuck took no notice of those lines.—But, positively, you must attend his lectures: you must, indeed. You cannot adore our immortal bard as you ought, without hearing Clutterbuck.— Looking at her watch. Bless me! how time flies!—I should, ere this, have been contemplating the divine lineaments of that Madonna.—You'll go with me, I hope?
CLERMONT. I am sorry it is not in my power; but allow me the honour of attending you to your carriage.
                                         Exeunt, disappearing among the bushes, as Lady Shrewdly and Miss Frankland enter from the house. MISS FRANKLAND.    I see a lady and gentleman yonder; who are they?
LADY SHREWDLY. Only Lady Worrymore and Clermont.— They left me some time ago; and her carriage waits for her at the wicket: but, I suppose they
 
have found it agreeable to take a sentimental saunter in the shrubbery.
MISS FRANKLAND. They have become mighty intimate. Who could have thought it?
LADY SHREWDLY. Vanity, as well as a city shower, occasions many strange acquaintances.
MISS FRANKLAND. But of a kind less transient. They do not part at the mouth of a shed or gateway, and meet again no more.
LADY SHREWDLY. Not always; but in the present instance the resemblance will hold good, even in this respect.
MISS FRANKLAND. I fear you deceive yourself.
LADY SHREWDLY. I believe I do not; but I will not be positive. You know Clermont better than I do.
MISS FRANKLAND. I thought I knew him; but I was mistaken.
Re-enter Clermont from the shrubbery, and bows to Miss Frankland without speaking. LADY SHREWDLY. You are grave, Mr. Clermont, and I trace
 
pondering lines upon your brow; may one know what engages your serious contemplation?
MISS FRANKLAND. The composition, perhaps, of verses for the prettily-bound album of Lady Worrymore.
CLERMONT.    A book that will not have the honour of being opened by a lady who dislikes poetry.
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, a lady of such a character might read that book, I believe, with very little offence. But when its pages are enriched with your sonnet, Mr. Clermont, the case will no doubt be altered.
CLERMONT. And, taking that alteration for granted, this same lady will then very willingly abstain entirely from reading it.
MISS FRANKLAND. Most willingly; she will not even distrust your pretensions so much as to examine the fact.
CLERMONT. I believe so. Cards of invitation, billets from a gay baronet, perhaps, or letters from country relations, afford reading enough for a prudent young lady who knows so well how to keep
 
imagination in subjection to plain common sense —Ay, that, I think, is the phrase for the paramount virtue you now so decidedly profess— plain common sense.
LADY SHREWDLY. A virtue, setting professions aside, of which there is mighty little in this garden at present, excepting some little scantlings that may, perhaps, belong to myself.—A truce with all this    sparring! Cannot one person like poetry and another prose, as one likes moor-fowl and another mutton, without offence?
CLERMONT. No, not even so, Lady Shrewdly, if the moor-fowl be cooked by one's neighbour, and the mutton by one's self.
MISS FRANKLAND. And Mr. Clermont may add, that if the morsel of one's own cooking has been honoured by the approval of an epicurean palate, it were treason to dispute its superiority.
LADY SHREWDLY putting her hand playfully to the lips of Miss Frankland . No more of this, foolish child!—Go into the house, I beseech you, and look for my pocketbook, which I have left upon some table or other.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. I do your bidding willingly.
                                         Exit. LADY SHREWDLY. Mr. Clermont, when young people, like yourself and Miss Frankland, quarrel together, I take no account of it; but if one can do the other any service, propose the business just as freely as if they were the best friends in the world.
CLERMONT. Explain your meaning, Lady Shrewdly. Can I in any way be useful to Miss Frankland?
LADY SHREWDLY. You can; and I engage your services on her behalf.
CLERMONT. I thank you—I thank you most heartily.—    But will she do so? Would not Sir John Crofton prove a more acceptable agent?—a more zealous one I defy him to be.
LADY SHREWDLY. No, no; it is a service he would never perform: not faithfully, I'm sure, standing, as it does, opposed to his own worldly designs.
CLERMONT. O tell me what it is, my dear Madam! I will do it most gladly.

 
LADY SHREWDLY. Go to all the resorts of low foreigners about town, and find out, if possible, the German juggler called Manhaunslet.
CLERMONT. The father of the boy Lady Worrymore admires so much?
LADY SHREWDLY. The same.
CLERMONT. What can she possibly have to do with such a man as that?
LADY SHREWDLY. What very few indeed would think of doing.
CLERMONT. How so?—I beg pardon for questioning so closely.
LADY SHREWDLY. Indeed, you need not: it will bear to be questioned. She is seeking to strip herself of fortune and all its advantages, for the sake of justice and affection.
CLERMONT. Of justice and affection?
LADY SHREWDLY. In short, she has taken it into her head, from    a strong resemblance, that that boy is the son of
 
her unfortunate cousin, who died abroad some years ago, and, consequently, the grandchild of her uncle.
CLERMONT. Generous creature! I am sure her actions are poetry, let her taste and fancy be what they may.
LADY SHREWDLY. Yes, somewhat too romantic for Sir John's present views; so that we cannot trust the business to him.
CLERMONT. No, hang him! I'll do it myself: I'll set about it forthwith. There is not a gambling-house, spunging-house, nor night-cellar within the bills of mortality that shall be unsearched.
LADY SHREWDLY. You take it up so eagerly that I cannot doubt your diligence. Good bye, for the present: I must return into the house, and release her from searching for what she will not find.
                                         Exit. CLERMONT. To foster a quarrel with me so capriciously and pettishly at such a conjuncture!—I understand her now.—She is a noble creature; but surely she might have done it less offensively.
                                         Exit by the garden.
 
SCENE III. The private Closet of Lord Worrymore. Enter his Lordship, with papers in his hand, followed by an Amanuensis. LORD WORRYMORE. Sit down at this table, and begin your task; and take good care to copy correctly the periods, the pauses, and the notes of admiration. Eloquence is wonderfully assisted in the reading by those little auxiliaries.
AMANUENSIS. I will, my Lord.
LORD WORRYMORE. And when you come to any very striking expressions, be sure to draw a line under them—so, showing him how, that the reader may do them justice, with a correspondent emphasis and elevation of voice.
AMANUENSIS. Certainly, my Lord: I shall mark all such passages as your Lordship may be pleased to point out.
LORD WORRYMORE. I should like you to mark also some passages of your own selecting: for an unlearned person
 
of common capacity will be struck with real eloquence surprisingly. When the former Corn Bill was brought into the House, and I had prepared my speech,—
Enter Blount. BLOUNT. Your speech, my Lord?
LORD WORRYMORE. Yes, Blount: I am just telling this young person here how surprisingly my own attorney was struck with some passages which I read to him    from my first speech on the Corn Laws; and a man, too, who has no more taste or cultivation than a coalheaver.
BLOUNT. I well believe it, my Lord. The want of both could never disqualify him from relishing the beauties of such a production.
LORD WORRYMORE. You have read it, then?
BLOUNT. I have heard of it. It was that effort of your genius, I understand, which helped to win the heart of Lady Worrymore.
LORD WORRYMORE sighing. Ay, it was even so: in those happier days
 
when her high-toned mind followed freely its own dictates; ere caprice and love of change had led it astray.
BLOUNT. Never mind; we shall bring it back again to as high tones as it ever uttered, and all upon the right string, too.
LORD WORRYMORE. And you think she will be charmed with this speech?
BLOUNT. My life upon it, she will be charmed beyond measure.
LORD WORRYMORE with affected modesty. I think she will be reasonably pleased.
BLOUNT. No, faith! that won't serve our purpose at all: she must be charmed to a folly.
LORD WORRYMORE. Ha! ha! ha! thou art a cunning fellow,    Blount; I'll get thee promoted in the navy for this. Going to the writing table, and overlooking the Amanuensis, who is busy writing. Let me see how far you have got.—Aha! within two words of the very passage. Mutters to himself as he looks at the papers, and making gestures of declamation, very pompously.

 
BLOUNT aside. What is the fool about?— Aloud. Some striking flowers of oratory, my Lord: one can see it by the fire of your eyes and the vehemence of your action. I am fortunate in witnessing the grace of your delivery: it is well for me to have a lesson.
LORD WORRYMORE. You shall judge, my friend! Lifting the manuscript from the table, and putting himself in a dignified attitude as he reads. “That grain which, by the hands of our own ploughmen, whistling in concert with the early lark, hath been deposited in the maternal bosom of our soil; that grain which hath waved in the gentle breezes of summer and of autumn, and fructified under the salubrious temperature of our native climate—” looking to him for applause.
BLOUNT. Very fine indeed! Such grain as that is too good for making quartern loaves of,—to be munched up by every dirty urchin that bawls about the streets.
LORD WORRYMORE chuckling with delight. No, no! my argument does not lean that way.
BLOUNT. You do it injustice: it will lean any way.

 
LORD WORRYMORE.    I only meant to prove that the lords of the soil should be allowed to defend the produce of their soil from competition and depreciation.— And that passage pleases you?
BLOUNT. Pleases me! if I say, delights me, will you doubt of my sincerity? No, my Lord; I am sure you will not.
LORD WORRYMORE with affected modesty. Why, I must frankly confess that I think it a tolerable specimen of parliamentary eloquence.— But here is something farther on, which has, perhaps, superior claims on your attention, if you will honour me with some portion of it.
BLOUNT. With it all, my dear Lord: can it possibly be better employed?
LORD WORRYMORE spreading his right arm, and assuming dignity, as before. “I am free to confess, my Lords, that the fruits of the earth have been given by the bounty of Providence for the sustenance of man.”
BLOUNT. That, the noble lords will certainly assent to; and, so far, the speech must be effective.

 
LORD WORRYMORE. But hear it out.—“The sustenance of man,” —mark ye now;—“the pot of the labourer; the oven of the cottager; the board of the marriage-feast, with all the fair faces surrounding it; the christening, and the merry-making; and even the sorrowful repast of those, who in the graves    of their forefathers have deposited their dead;— yes, I am free to confess, my Lords, that there, on such occasions, should the healthful produce of our native fields be found in abundance. But would you have the repasts of England's valiant sons and lovely daughters drawn from foreign climes?—from fields unlike to those in which they have joyfully beheld the green blade shoot, and the poppy wave its gay head in the sun?— from fields barren to them of all dear associations and sympathies which are the nurture of the mind?—I will not wrong noble Lords so much as to suppose it.”
BLOUNT. If they can allow, after that, one penny loaf of foreign flour to thicken the pottage of a drover, they deserve to be choked with it themselves.
LORD WORRYMORE. Ha! ha! ha! it amuses me to see you take it up so heartily. Well, I love you the better for it; though you do express your thoughts in your own sailor-like fashion. I thought it would strike you.—And you must do it justice, my young
 
friend; you must read it with emphasis and all appropriate action.
BLOUNT. Neither emphasis nor action shall be spared, depend upon it; but as to doing it justice, you    know that is impossible.
LORD WORRYMORE. O! you are too flattering—too partial.
BLOUNT. But are you sure, my Lord, that Lady Worrymore has never heard any part of this speech before?—no morsel of it, dropping from your lips unguardedly?
LORD WORRYMORE. No: I have been too much offended with her of late to repeat to her one word of it. She does not even know that I have prepared a speech on the subject.
BLOUNT. A fortunate forbearance!
LORD WORRYMORE. And I reckoned, too, that her surprise would be the greater after its success in the House; as no doubt it would, had the measure been brought forward at the time that was appointed for it.
BLOUNT. Then all is safe.—There is a gentle knock at
 
the door. Permit me. Opens the door, and enter Lady Shrewdly, with a box in her hand.
LADY SHREWDLY looking round her. In busy preparation, I see.—And I, too, have been busy, and have found my way up the back staircase without meeting any body.—How do you get on?
LORD WORRYMORE. I assure your Ladyship we get on famously. I think our plot sure of success. None of the finer parts of the speech are lost upon this young man. He has a native taste, though uncultivated:    he will do justice to them all.
LADY SHREWDLY. With the help of this wig, and a proper solemnity. Taking a wig from the box, which she puts upon Blount's head. There; who but must admire the sapient countenance of the great orator Mr. O'Honikin?—And has Clermont's sonnet been exchanged for the more precious gem of his lordship?
BLOUNT. I have taken care of that, and it is now in Lady Worrymore's own keeping, under promise that the sealed envelope is not to be opened till the reading hour.
LADY SHREWDLY. I'm glad of it. Adieu, then, till we meet at
 
the place of trial, and, I trust, of triumph, my Lord. Going.
LORD WORRYMORE preventing her. Nay, you must stay just to hear him read one of his favourite passages.
LADY SHREWDLY. I thank you very much; but I am in a particular hurry.
LORD WORRYMORE. Nay, nay; but a short passage, and I'll read it myself.
LADY SHREWDLY. Indeed, I am in a hurry.
LORD WORRYMORE. You must hear it. I'll detain you but a few moments. Running her up to the wall, as she tries to make her escape.
LADY SHREWDLY. Let me go, I beseech you: I hear Lady Worrymore coming.
                                         Exit hastily, while he looks round in alarm. LORD WORRYMORE listening.    I hear nobody coming.
BLOUNT. It was but a trick to get away.

 
LORD WORRYMORE. What a desperate haste she must be in! Going to the table, and seeing the Amanuensis at a loss. Write on, my friend: what's the matter?
AMANUENSIS. There's something wrong here.
LORD WORRYMORE. That's impossible.
AMANUENSIS. There must be a page wanting.
LORD WORRYMORE examining the papers. Truly, so there is. I must have dropt it in the library.
                                         Exit into the library. BLOUNT aside, looking at the Amanuensis. Silly fellow, to mention such a discovery! It would have made as good sense without the page as with it.
LORD WORRYMORE calling behind the scenes, from the library. Bring light here: I can see nothing.
                                         Exit Amanuensis, carrying a light, and Blount following.
 
SCENE IV. A narrow Ante-room or Hall; Servants seen crossing the Stage from opposite sides. FIRST SERVANT. Have you been listening, Tim? You seem mightily diverted.
SECOND SERVANT. I had no occasion to listen; for I contrived business for myself, as it were, and stole quietly into the room, and saw all the company, and the oration-man busy in his vocation: and hard work it is, I'll assure you.
FIRST SERVANT. Hard work! it is only words out of his mouth, is it not? A country curate would think nothing on't.
SECOND SERVANT. Only words out of his mouth, say ye? Both legs and arms are at work, like any weaver busy on the treadles: and for making of mouths, and grinning and staring under the curls of that blouzing wig of his, it's unpossible for me to gi' you any notion on 't. I would not undertake to supply either lords or ladies wi' such a turbullion
 
of roaring, and thumping, and winnowing of arms, for a month's wages twice told. I've seen the stage doctor at Barth'lomew fair, but he is but a joke to it. Listen, man! you can hear him through the wall.
                                          Blount's voice heard without. FIRST SERVANT listening. Faith, so I do!—And how does my Lady take it?
SECOND SERVANT.    Ay, she has nearly as hard work in admiring him, as he has with his eloquence, as they call it. Lord help her to a soberer way of commending folks, for her body's sake! She'll be in a fever by the evening.
FIRST SERVANT. Never mind that; she's an able-bodied person enough, for all that she casts up her eyes, and smells at her bottle of salts so often.—But here comes Mr. Clermont's Ned.
Enter a Third Servant. THIRD SERVANT. Is my master here?
SECOND SERVANT. Yes, but he came last of all the company: my Lady inquired for him twenty times over, before he appeared.

 
FIRST SERVANT. What kept him so long, I wonder?
THIRD SERVANT. It was more wonderful that he got here at all.
FIRST SERVANT. How so?
THIRD SERVANT. He has been in all the raggamuffin places in London, after a raggamuffin foreigner.
SECOND SERVANT. And did he find him?
THIRD SERVANT. No; it was all labour lost. But I have just discovered where he is certainly to be found; and if you would let me into the room for a moment, that I may whisper it in his ear, I should be greatly obliged to thee, Tim.
SECOND SERVANT. Let ye into the room! Not till ye gi' me a    good silver sixpence, I warrant ye.
THIRD SERVANT. A silver sixpence, for speaking to my own master!
SECOND SERVANT. Ay; and for seeing as good a show as any
 
body ever paid half a crown to gape at.—List! list! he's roaring again.
                                          Blount's voice heard as before. THIRD SERVANT. Well; I must speak to my master, be the cost what it may.
SECOND SERVANT. Come along, then.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE V. The grand Library: Blount is discovered standing on a platform, with a table before him and his MS. oration in his hand, surrounded by Lord and Lady Worrymore, Lady Shrewdly, Miss Frankland, Clermont, &c. &c., while a general murmur of applause is heard, as the scene opens. BLOUNT in a low voice, as if much exhausted. Pardon me for a moment. Takes a glass of water from the table and drinks it slowly.
LADY WORRYMORE running about from one person to another. LADY WORRYMORE. Was there ever any thing so eloquent?—Is it not sublime?—And you love poetry, Lady
 
Tweedle; is it not poetical, too? A scholar like you, Mr. Clermont, must know how to appreciate its excellence.
SIR JOHN CROFTON. His learning were of little value else. Those who have studied Demosthenes and Cicero will know what to think of this, pretty accurately.
LADY WORRYMORE. I am delighted to hear you say so, Sir John. Demosthenes! Cicero! Oh, it makes my heart stir within me to hear those names pronounced! and those only who love their immortal works can do justice to the eloquence of Mr. O'Honikin.
LORD WORRYMORE going up to them, rubbing his hands and chuckling. And you like it, Lady Worrymore?—And you like it, Sir John?—Both very right: he's a clever fellow; both very right. What do you say, Mr. Clermont?
CLERMONT. Every one is right to be pleased when he can.
LADY WORRYMORE. What an observation, applied to the fervour of our admiration!
LORD WORRYMORE laying his hand soothingly on Clermont's arm. Don't be so grave, my dear Sir: have patience
 
—have patience: your pretty sonnet will claim its own share of admiration presently. Going with great complacency from one person to another.    I hope you like him?—I hope you like the speech. Very good; all very clever. At least, I am told so—it does not become me to speak.
LADY SHREWDLY aside, pulling his sleeve. Have a care: you'll discover all with that false modesty.
LORD WORRYMORE aside to Lady Shrewdly . No, no! I'm cunning; I manage very well. Aloud. My Lady Worrymore, what did you think of that part about the Ploughman and the Lark, and the waving of the poppies?—very fine, was it not? No, no! I don't mean fine, neither; rather too fanciful.
LADY WORRYMORE. You are a cold critic, my Lord. It requires a kindred spirit with the writer's to admire such exquisite imagery.
LORD WORRYMORE. Very right; so it does, and you are akin to him, dear wife.
LADY WORRYMORE. Hush! he has recovered, and is going to resume.

 
BLOUNT after having sipped the water and rubbed his forehead with an affected languor, takes up his paper and proceeds. “I have now, my Lords—I mean, my honourable friends—put you in possession of the views, ideas, and opinions of a humble individual, who has cogitated on this momentous subject with a sincere, a pure, a vivid, an ardent desire to enlighten the understandings, to rouse the proper feelings, of others; and I am free to confess, that I feel it to be my duty, humble    individual as I am: I feel it to be my duty, and am free to confess, that it will give me the most unfeigned delight and satisfaction, if I have but roused one spirit to its duty—warmed one bosom with the feelings which ought to be felt on such a momentous subject—loosened from the trammels of prejudice one intelligent, enlightened, and intellectual compatriot.” Bows affectedly, and lays down the paper, whilst a murmur of applause fills the room.
LADY WORRYMORE to Clermont . What a beautiful conclusion, Mr. Clermont! Can one say more of it than that it is worthy of the divine passages which preceded it?
CLERMONT. That is exactly what I should say of it, and I am glad it will satisfy your Ladyship.

 
LADY WORRYMORE. O that word satisfy! I'll speak no more to you. Running eagerly to Blount as he descends from the platform. O my dear Mr. O'Honikin! you have laid us under eternal obligations. I shall now know what the ancient orators of Greece would have been, had they lived in our own times.
SIR JOHN CROFTON. And spoken upon the corn laws.
LORD WORRYMORE with great pleasure and vivacity. And you are pleased, Sir John? And you are enchanted, Lady Worrymore?
LADY WORRYMORE. Yes; rather more so, I believe, than your Lordship.
LORD WORRYMORE.    Very right; I find no fault with you for that, my Lady; it is right to be enchanted with a clever thing, let others feel as they may. Is it not, Miss Frankland? Is it not, Lady Tweedle? Clapping Blount's shoulder. O, my dear Orator! you have done your part to admiration: you have given such expression to my thoughts.
LADY WORRYMORE to Blount . What does he say?

 
BLOUNT. That I—I—his Lordship does me the honour to say that I have given expression to his thoughts; graciously insinuating, that the poor ideas I have just delivered are akin to those which he himself entertains.
LADY WORRYMORE contemptuously, and in a low voice to Blount . Which are always akin to whatever he happens to hear last.
BLOUNT. And must, in this bright metropolis, find a goodly clan of relations.
LADY WORRYMORE. And, my dear Mr. O'Honikin! what alternations of humility and generous confidence! The humble individual, who feels it to be his duty to rouse to action, to warm with—How did it go?
BLOUNT. O, dear Lady, you make me blush!—To rouse to duty—warm to feeling—loosen from the trammels of prejudice my enlightened, intelligent,    and intellectual compatriots. All that a humble individual like myself could possibly hope to achieve.

 
LORD WORRYMORE. And has he not achieved it? has he not, my love?
LADY WORRYMORE aside. What, is he here again!
LADY SHREWDLY aside to Lord Worrymore . Be quiet, my Lord, or you'll betray the whole.
LORD WORRYMORE aside to Lady Shrewdly . Well, well! I'm as quiet as a mouse.
LADY SHREWDLY. But you forget the sonnet, Lady Worrymore, in your admiration of the speech.
LADY WORRYMORE. I beg your pardon, Mr. Clermont; I beg a thousand pardons.
CLERMONT. One, Madam, is more than enough.
LADY WORRYMORE taking a packet from her reticule. This most prized and precious packet. Opening it and holding out a paper to Clermont.  Pray, dear Sir, do you now occupy the seat of Mr. O'Honikin, and emparadise our souls with the effusions of your divine muse.

 
CLERMONT. Pardon me, Madam; myself and my verses are utterly unworthy to occupy the place of such superlative predecessors.
LADY WORRYMORE. Nay, nay; you will read them yourself; no one else would give them their proper expression.
CLERMONT. Excuse me: excuse me.
BLOUNT. And excuse me, also, for presuming to offer my    husky voice for that service which Mr. Clermont too modestly declines.
LADY WORRYMORE. How delightfully obliging! but I fear it will exhaust you too much.
LORD WORRYMORE eagerly. Not a bit, not a bit! to it, dear Orator, and give us the sonnet, too.
BLOUNT receiving the paper from Lady Worrymore: returns to the platform, and reads affectedly as before. SONNET TO A YOUNG LADY.
The pretty gadfly, sporting in the rays
   Of Sol's bright beams, is heedless of the pain
   The noble steed doth from its sting sustain.
On his arch'd neck and sleeky sides it plays.
 

   Darting now here, now there, its pointed sting;
While he, impatient of the frequent smart,
Doth bound, and paw, and rear, and wince, and start,
   And scours across the plain.—But nought doth bring
Relief to his sharp torment:—So do I,
   Poor luckless wight! by Love's keen arrows gall'd,
From thee, my little pretty teazer-fly.
But, ah! in vain! there is in me no power
   To shake thee off; nor art thou ever pall'd
With this thy cruel sport, in ball-room, bank, or bower. LADY WORRYMORE. Delightful, delightful! I expected to be charmed with your sonnet, Mr. Clermont, but this outdoes all expectation.
CLERMONT. And all patience at the same time, Madam.
LADY WORRYMORE. Nay, don't let the modesty of genius suppose    that we could possibly think it tedious. How delightful the lady must have been to whom that sonnet was addressed! A young lady, as the title gives notice.
CLERMONT. The younger the better, I'm sure, for receiving such verses.
LORD WORRYMORE. What does he say? Does his modesty shrink from praise?
CLERMONT. My Lord, I can suffer this no longer: so
 
much honour thrust upon me, to which I have no pretensions, is—
LORD WORRYMORE aside to Clermont . Come this way, and receive a private word in your ear.
LADY SHREWDLY aside to Lord Worrymore . Let me speak to him, my Lord, and do you enjoy your secret triumph. Draws Clermont away to a corner where she continues speaking to him in dumb show.
LADY WORRYMORE. Was such beautiful poetry, with such a modest poet, ever yet combined?
SIR JOHN CROFTON. He blushed deeply, indeed: and, methinks, fixing his eyes on Miss Frankland  he has a fair friend here who sympathises with his modesty, if one may judge from the colour of her cheeks. Ah! when shall I receive such proofs of sympathy?
MISS FRANKLAND. When you blush at all, Sir John. You can scarcely expect from your friends this token of sympathy till you give them an opportunity.
BLOUNT.    Yes, our poet blushed a little, I believe, as I
 
read his verses; he was scarcely aware of their excellence.
LORD WORRYMORE. How should he; how should he? One makes but slight account of one's own. It is a pretty thing enough in its way; but you honour it too much, perhaps. He, he, he! Chuckling and rubbing his hands. Don't you think so, Lady Tweedle? Don't you think so, Miss Fussit? Don't you think so, my love?
LADY WORRYMORE impatiently. You tread on my flounces, my Lord. Honour such a poem too much? it is impossible! I'll have a gadfly painted on my fan, and worship it.
ALL THE LADIES  Miss Frankland excepted. So will I—so will we all.
BLOUNT. And what more will you do, dear ladies, to honour your divine poet?
LADY WORRYMORE. And our divine orator, too, Mr. O'Honikin.
LORD WORRYMORE. Crown their busts with laurels, my Lady Worrymore, with your own fair hands.
LADY WORRYMORE. Charming! that is the classical tribute which
 
my heart pants to bestow. I would not live an hour without doing it, if I had but their busts and a garland.
LORD WORRYMORE. I'll find the busts this very evening, my love, if you'll find the laurels.
LADY WORRYMORE.    Thank you, my Lord! How amiable it is in you to be so ready in honouring the merit of others! Let it then be so arranged, and this evening in the garden, before sunset, the tribute shall be paid; to which solemnity curtseying around her I bid ye all.
LORD WORRYMORE. Bravo, my dear wife! Done like a most courteous and graceful lady. He! he! he! I thought it would please you. Did you mark the last line of it, ending thus—“Ball-room, bank, and bower?” It cost the poet some trouble, no doubt, to find such alliteration as that.
BLOUNT. Unless it came by the Muse's inspiration, which is a convenient help for any poet, and saves the frail bark of his fancy a plaguy course of tacking. But you say nothing of the beginning of the piece, which shows such richness of expression:

 

“The pretty gadfly, sporting in the rays
Of Sol's bright beams”— steeping, as it were, the brightness of the sun in his own brightness. This is what may be called supererogation or opulence of language.
LADY WORRYMORE. So it is: a most ingenious and judicious remark.
LORD WORRYMORE. You are a clever fellow, O'Honikin.
SIR JOHN CROFTON. As good a critic as an orator.
Enter a Servant, announcing something in dumb show. LORD WORRYMORE.    Ay, there is some little refreshment, I suppose, in the next room. Pray do us the honour. Offering his arm to a lady.
                                         Exeunt.
 
ACT III. SCENE I. — Colonel Frankland's House. Enter Miss Frankland, with a scarf or shawl on her shoulders, as if going out, meeting Barbara, who enters by the opposite side. BARBARA. Sir John Crofton is below, madam.
MISS FRANKLAND. And have you not told him that I am going out?
BARBARA. I did so, my dear lady; but what use is there in denying you to a gentleman who says he will return an hour hence, or an hour after that, or an hour after that again, should it be more convenient to you?
MISS FRANKLAND. Does he request to be admitted so earnestly?
BARBARA. Yes, indeed; and his requests are like the sails of a windmill, always returning.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. Very likely, Barbara, when there is breeze enough to swell them.
BARBARA. How so, madam?
MISS FRANKLAND. You smile on him when he comes, perhaps, as if you would say, “My mistress is going out, but I know she will be pleased to see you, Sir John.”
BARBARA. Indeed, indeed, I did not, madam; and for any little presents he has given—I mean offered me, I scorn them as much as any body. But, I must needs own, madam, that I likes to see a genteel titled gentleman enter the house, who speaks to a poor servant cheerily, better than a    grave stately Mr. Thingumy, who passes one as if one were the door-post.
MISS FRANKLAND. Don't be so discomposed, Barbara; I beg pardon if my suspicions wrong you. Be this as it may, I believe you wish me well.
BARBARA. Ay, that I do; I wish you well, and rich, and every thing that is good. And lady sounds better than mistress at any rate. I little thought, after serving you almost twenty years as dry-nurse,
 
school-nurse, and own maid, to be but the attendant of a plain gentlewoman at last.
MISS FRANKLAND laughing. For thy sake, then, I had better look out for a peer. However, since it must be, desire Sir John Crofton to come up stairs.                                          Exit Barbara. It is an unpleasant moment, and I shrink from it, but the sooner it is over the better. Ay, and to settle the matter with a good grace for him, and without mortification to myself, it must be done quickly.
Enter Sir John Crofton. SIR JOHN. I thank you, Miss Frankland, for this condescension: five minutes of your company is precious when one cannot obtain more. But are you, indeed, obliged to go out?
MISS FRANKLAND. I really have business which obliges me to go.
SIR JOHN. And I have business pardon me for calling it    by that name which requires you to stay. Will you honour me so far? Setting chairs and sitting down by her. Miss Frankland, there are situations which must plead a man's excuse
 
for abruptness—for precipitancy—for—for— in short, you understand me. I see by the glance of her eye, that Miss Frankland understands me to be in the most awkward situation that a man of feeling can be placed in.
MISS FRANKLAND. And is it on that account the more likely to embarrass Sir John Crofton?
SIR JOHN. That sarcastic question does me the greatest injustice. Laying his hand on his heart. Could you read the real sentiments which are here embosomed, you would know how ardent, how disinterested, how unalterable is that attachment to your cruel self which you seem so inclined to sport with.
MISS FRANKLAND. In that case I should certainly know it, and regulate my gratitude accordingly.
SIR JOHN. What frigid formal words may come from the fairest lips on the most interesting subjects! Gratitude! Oh, Miss Frankland! you know that it is something far more precious than gratitude which I would gladly earn from you by    the whole affections of my heart, the whole devotion of my life and of my fortune.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. And if I can give you no more, your suit of course is at an end, and free to be preferred in some more worthy and favourable quarter.
SIR JOHN. O, do not say so! a more favourable, I painfully feel, may be easily found; a more worthy, never.
MISS FRANKLAND. You set upon me an imaginary value.
SIR JOHN. Call it not so: I repeat my words; and permit me to add, adorable girl, that where worth is, favour deserves to be waited for. Say, that in a fortnight hence, I may have some chance of subduing your reluctance.
MISS FRANKLAND shaking her head. I cannot.
SIR JOHN. In a month, then?
MISS FRANKLAND as before. That would make no difference.
SIR JOHN. Say two months, then—six months; ay, a whole year, if you can be so cruel as to withhold your consent to make me happy for so long a period.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. That is a cruelty I shall never be guilty of.
SIR JOHN. You delight, you transport me! on my knees I thank you, most bewitching of creatures!
MISS FRANKLAND. Rise up, Sir John, and waste no thanks on so    small an obligation; but hear me out. Withholding my consent is a cruelty, as you are pleased to call it, of which I shall never be guilty, since what will never be given, cannot be said to be withheld for any period.
SIR JOHN rising from his knees angrily. Upon my honour, Miss Frankland, you are a practised angler, a very practised angler, no doubt; but do not think to hook a trout with bait that suits a gudgeon.
MISS FRANKLAND. You are angry, Sir John, and that admonishes me that I should be plain—that I should be honest.
SIR JOHN. Ay, very honest, no doubt. Going hastily away, and returning. Nay, nay, nay! I am not angry; and you shall be as honest as you will, but kind at the same time.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. As you understand the word kind, the two are incompatible.
SIR JOHN. And how does Miss Frankland understand it, pray?
MISS FRANKLAND. That to put a speedy end to all suspense, even by a flat refusal, is kind in every thing that regards the affections; if I am not too presumptuous in supposing the present proposal to be a case of that nature.
SIR JOHN.    Faith, it is at least one of an extraordinary nature, and may excuse all concerned with it from the common rules of ceremony and etiquette. Crossing the floor, then returning with a conceited smile. Pardon me, Miss Frankland; I feel myself still at liberty to watch for some more propitious moment.
MISS FRANKLAND. Your patience will be tired out ere you find it; and so will the patience of my friend looking at her watch , whom I promised to meet nearly half an hour ago.
                                         Curtseying to Sir John, who retires tardily, and lays his hand on his heart as he disappears.
 
MISS FRANKLAND alone. O self-conceit, self-conceit! how is the most downright person in the world, restrained by the common rules of society, to deal with thee? And if thou art the cause of perseverance, what shall we say of the high-lauded virtue of constancy?
Enter Lady Shrewdly. LADY SHREWDLY. Is it possible, Fanny Frankland? I could not have believed it.
MISS FRANKLAND. What is it that so thwarts your belief?
LADY SHREWDLY. That you should encourage the addresses of Sir John Crofton, because Clermont for a season was cajoled by the affected ardour of Lady Worrymore. You might have seen very well that he was ashamed of his sonnet, and enjoyed not the praises she lavished on it.
MISS FRANKLAND. And what puts it into your head that I have    encouraged his addresses?
LADY SHREWDLY. I met him just now on the stairs, smiling to himself very knowingly, and when I asked him,
 
with a significant look, how affairs prospered with him here, his answer was a nod of complacency, which wanted no words of explanation.
MISS FRANKLAND. I have given him as decided a refusal as my knowledge of civil language could provide me with.
LADY SHREWDLY. My poor simple creature! what dictionary in the world will furnish language sufficiently explicit to make a vain puppy understand that a woman will not have him? I should have understood his foolish smile better; pardon me, dear child.
MISS FRANKLAND. But it does not signify; he will understand it distinctly enough to-morrow without a dictionary's help, for I am convinced that our little boy is the son of poor Emma.
LADY SHREWDLY. We shall know that soon, for the German will be here to answer the questions of your uncle in a quarter of an hour. Clermont was indefatigable in finding him out.
MISS FRANKLAND. Was he?

 
LADY SHREWDLY. Yes, he was; and why do you say this so    languidly?
MISS FRANKLAND. To speak sincerely, then, I but half like his eagerness in helping to make me a poor woman.
LADY SHREWDLY. Fie, fie, Fanny Frankland! your heart is an unfit place for unworthy thoughts to harbour in.
MISS FRANKLAND. They sometimes harbour in better hearts than mine.
LADY SHREWDLY. Ay, they are subtle imps, that for a moment will find shelter anywhere; but they are quickly turned adrift, and have rest and entertainment only with the unworthy.
MISS FRANKLAND. I thank you! I thank you most gratefully, my dear Lady Shrewdly, for this friendly correction; I cast the base thought from my breast. I have given him cause by my petulance to suppose that I am not a fit companion for him, and therefore every thing particular between us is justly at an end. Why should I suppose that he has served me on this occasion from any but amiable motives?

 
LADY SHREWDLY. Indeed you ought not to suppose it.
MISS FRANKLAND. Alas, my dear friend!
LADY SHREWDLY. Why that sigh?
MISS FRANKLAND. Do you know that I am afraid of myself?
LADY SHREWDLY. And why, dear child; of what are you afraid?
MISS FRANKLAND.    I fear that, when I am comparatively poor, I sha'n't bear the neglect of the world and my own insignificance as I ought.
LADY SHREWDLY. Nay, that very fear is a voice from heaven for thy preservation.
MISS FRANKLAND. May it prove so! I feel I shall be supported in doing what is right; and feeling what is right may at length follow raising her eyes to heaven , if my humble sacrifice be accepted.
LADY SHREWDLY. And it will be accepted, my own honest girl! But you were going out, I know, and I will not
 
detain you: pray permit me to get into the carriage with you, that I may enjoy your company the longer.
MISS FRANKLAND. You are very kind.
                                         Exeunt arm in arm. SCENE II. Colonel Frankland's Apartment. Enter Paterson with books, which he lays upon a table, and then wheels his master's easy chair to its proper place. PATERSON alone. Ay, this here book of maps has had a long rest in the old bookcase; I wonder what campaigns and battles he has got into his head now. Howsomever, it signifies little, so as they can keep his notions of his own constitution, as he calls it, and ill-formed gout and affection of the kidneys, and the Lord knows what! out of it.
Enter Colonel Frankland, leaning on his stick. COLONEL FRANKLAND after seating himself, and looking at his hand. I think this stiffness in my joints must be
 
somehow connected with this uneasy feeling in my back: dost thou not think so, Paterson? yet the doctor says it is not.
PATERSON. And should not he know best, sir? Lord bless your honour! my joints are stiff, as most old men's are; and my back aches often enough, God wot! but I never think of asking the doctor about it. Take a musket in your hand and pace about the gallery a bit, and I'll warrant your back will get better.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Thou'rt a rough physician, Paterson.
LAURIE. But a kind one, your honour, and that is more than can be said of some that are smoother.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Well, well; there's no changing thy nature, and I must e'en receive such sympathy as thou hast to give.
Enter Servant. SERVANT.    The German foreigner is come, Sir, that you wished to see. Miss Frankland desired me to tell you.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Let him come to me here.

 
SERVANT. And the little master too, sir?
COLONEL FRANKLAND agitated. No, no! let him come by himself; Miss Frankland will look to the child.                                          Exit Servant. Hast thou any notion, Paterson, what this outlandish fellow has been sent for?
PATERSON. I have a kind of notion, I know not how, about it. Does your honour wish me to leave the room?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Stay where thou art; I would rather have thee by me. Enter Manhaunslet. To Manhaunslet.  You are a foreigner, I understand, and have brought a little boy with you to this country.
MANHAUNSLET. Yes, hon'rable sur.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Is he your own son?
MANHAUNSLET. He be good as son to me.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. That is no direct answer. Tell me the honest
 
truth, and whatever it may be, I will reward thee for it. And if you say what is false, I am not such a dunderhead but I shall find it out.
PATERSON. Ay; his honour will find you out, so you had    better speak the plain truth at once.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. The boy, then, is not your own son; is he your relation?
MANHAUNSLET. Do not know.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Whose son is he?
MANHAUNSLET. Do not know.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Where was he born?
MANHAUNSLET. Do not know.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. How did he fall into your hands? Answer me plainly; don't hesitate.
PATERSON. Nay, your honour; he'll say “do not know” to that too. Just let him tell his story after his
 
own fashion, and pick the truth out of it the best way you can. If it does not hang together, you can question him afterwards.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. I believe thou art right, Paterson. Tell me your story your own way, my friend. I have a curiosity to know how you came by the child, and I will pay you handsomely for satisfying it. And you need not be afraid of my taking the boy from you, till I have made you willing to part with him.
MANHAUNSLET. Der be eight years ago, dat I passed trou de small town in Bohemia, in de night. When in one moment de large inn house burst into flame,    and somebody wid two long arms trowed de child out from window, which I did catch in my gaberdine.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And did you not learn what strangers were in the inn, and to whom he belonged?
MANHAUNSLET. One poor gentleman, who was taken ill in de house, and died of illness and of de burnings on dat night.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What countryman was he?

 
MANHAUNSLET. Do not know.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What papers, clothes, or goods did he leave behind him?
MANHAUNSLET. All turned to cinder.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What clothes had the child upon him, when you caught him in your gaberdine?
MANHAUNSLET. One littel shirt.
LAURIE. Had it any letters marked upon it?
MANHAUNSLET. No.
LAURIE. Where is that shirt now?
MANHAUNSLET. It lie wid many oder rags to manure de cornfields of Bohemia.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And this is all you have to tell us of the boy?
MANHAUNSLET. Not all.

 
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Tell me the rest, then, quickly.
MANHAUNSLET. Dere be no better boy for de tight rope, and    de tumbling, and de jugglery, in all de worl: and he never telled no lie—no, not at all.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Hang the tight rope and the jugglery! Thou hast given him a notable education, no doubt; and a fine varlet he will be to receive into any family. So you have nothing more to tell me about the child?
MANHAUNSLET. Notting more.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What a romantic visionary track that dear girl has pursued! Call her in, Paterson; I'll see the poor child now with more composure.                                          Exit Paterson. He is profitable to you, I suppose?
MANHAUNSLET. He earn money for me; he is my living.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. I understand you, friend, and have no wish to do you any wrong.

 
Enter Miss Frankland, leading Hugho, and followed by Mrs. Brown and Paterson. MISS FRANKLAND advancing to her uncle with Hugho . See, my dear uncle.
COLONEL FRANKLAND starting from his seat. Very like; ay, very like, indeed. Look up, my pretty child; look in my face steadily.— Would I could certainly know who was thy mother!— Turns away from him, and then returns and looks at him again. —Be whose child thou may, thou art a creature worth cherishing. Give me thy hand. Takes his hand and examines it. The very form of her fingers and nails; they were particular. Staggers back and sinks again into his chair, quite overcome.
MISS FRANKLAND.    My dear uncle, bear up cheerily. You see I have brought you what was well worth the bringing.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Thou hast indeed, dear Fanny; and for thy sake, were the resemblance less, he shall live as a child in my family, and be taken from his present way of life.

 
MISS FRANKLAND. I thank you, dear uncle.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. We have no reasonable proof of his parentage.
MISS FRANKLAND. I know not what you have learnt from Mr. Manhaunslet; but if this statement from the Genoese ambassador, in answer to the queries of Clermont, agree with it, you will have something of evidence to rest on. Offering him a paper.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Read it thyself; I cannot—no, don't read it; tell me the substance of it; that will suffice.
MISS FRANKLAND. It says that Madame Martoni became the mother of a boy a few weeks before her death, and that Martoni, with the child, left Italy the year after to go into Bohemia, but from that time was never heard of more.
COLONEL FRANKLAND catching Hugho in his arms and kissing him. If thou art her boy—if thou art, indeed.— O, that I were assured of it!
MISS FRANKLAND. Mrs. Brown, you said something about a gold heart which you took from his neck.

 
MRS. BROWN. Yes, madam, I put it up when he was sick,    for I thought Lady Worrymore would lay her hands upon it.—Here it is. Giving a locket to Miss Frankland, who shows it to the Colonel .
MISS FRANKLAND. Do you know it, Sir?
COLONEL FRANKLAND shaking his head. I do not. To Manhaunslet.  Was it on the child when you first found him?
MANHAUNSLET. It was rount his neck. It is ornament dat our women and oder countries' women do wear; de are sold in Italian and German fairs not greatly dear.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. It must be hollow; does it open?
MANHAUNSLET. Not open.
PATERSON. Let me look; perhaps it does. Turning it round. This little ornament may be a spring. Presses and opens it.
COLONEL FRANKLAND eagerly. Hast thou found any thing?

 
PATERSON. A small bit of paper enclosing this lock of hair. There, your honour.
COLONEL FRANKLAND taking the paper from Paterson and reading. “A lock of my father's hair.” It is written in her own small hand, and this is the very lock which she cut from my head when—Oh, oh! and she loved me to the last, though she wounded me so grievously! Embraces Hugho again and again, then crosses the room hastily. Come to my room presently, Fanny, and bring the boy with thee.
                                         Exit. MANHAUNSLET. Ha, Master Hugho! you be one gentleman    now.
MRS. BROWN. And right glad to leave you, I think.
HUGHO. No, Dame Brown; he fed, he clothed me, and did beat me very seldom.
MRS. BROWN. Except when the monkey and thee quarrelled, and then he always took part with that odious brute.
MISS FRANKLAND. Say no more of this, good Mrs. Brown: let every thing unpleasant be forgotten. Colonel
 
Frankland will settle every thing to your satisfaction. To Paterson.  Lead them to the housekeeper's room, and take good care of them both.
                                         As Paterson is leading them away Hugho runs to them, kisses Mrs. Brown's hand, and gives his hand kindly to Manhaunslet.  HUGHO. See you bote again: see you often, and glad of it.
MISS FRANKLAND. That is right, Hugho. And now you must come with me, and be a good child to your old grandfather.
HUGHO. And good boy to you always; to love you, and bide wid you, and do all your bidding. O! I will tumble, and juggle, and sing to you all day long, if you will. Wrapping himself fondly in the skirt of her gown, and clinging to her as they go off.
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE III. Lord Worrymore's Garden. Two Busts, covered with linen, in the back-ground, and Company assembled, amongst whom are discovered Lord Worrymore, Lady Shrewdly, &c. &c. LORD WORRYMORE to Servants. Move the busts this way; this is the best possible spot for them. Servants move the busts on their pedestals to the front of the Stage. She will be here in a moment. But where is Blount?
                                         Retires amongst the crowd at the bottom of the Stage, whilst Lady Shrewdly and Sir John Crofton come forward. SIR JOHN. So the fair lady has unseated herself with her own busy hands, and torn from her own brow all the grace and honours of an heiress?
LADY SHREWDLY. It has indeed been her own doing.
SIR JOHN. And a very foolish one, too: the age of romance has been long passed.

 
LADY SHREWDLY. And will not be revived, I perceive, by Sir John Crofton.
SIR JOHN. No, faith! the world, as it stands, is good enough for me.
LADY SHREWDLY. I have the honour to agree with you entirely upon that point.
SIR JOHN. Find out a puny urchin to disinherit herself! —I have made a very narrow—I mean, any one who has thought of offering to her, has had a narrow escape.
LADY SHREWDLY. And if it be honourable, as well as narrow, you have reason to be pleased.
SIR JOHN. Did she know of this brat and his birthrights this morning when I saw her?
LADY SHREWDLY.    She suspected it then; and the expression you wore on your face, as I passed you on the stair, of a favoured lover, showed me plainly enough that you did not.
SIR JOHN. Nay, Lady Shrewdly; you mistook that expression.

 
LADY SHREWDLY. I should have understood it to mean, then, that you were not favoured.
SIR JOHN. When it is necessary that Lady Shrewdly should be informed of my private affairs, I shall have the honour to answer her queries.
LADY SHREWDLY. And when such information can reflect any credit upon Sir John Crofton, I presume he will deem it necessary. Enter Blount. Ha! Blount come at last: and not far behind comes Colonel Frankland and his niece.
Enter Colonel Frankland, leaning on Clermont and Miss Frankland; and Sir John Crofton, making them a distant bow, retires to the bottom of the Stage. COLONEL FRANKLAND. I thank thee, Clermont: thy arm makes a good support for an old man.
CLERMONT. And is one always at your service, my dear Sir.

 
COLONEL FRANKLAND. I thank thee, my good fellow. Thou art as kind as ever, and as simple, too, methinks; but how comes it that thy bust, as they tell me, is to be crowned with laurel for that sonnet of thine, which Fanny, to say the honest truth, has not praised much.
LORD WORRYMORE now advancing to the front, and overhearing them.    How so? Not praised much. Ha! ha! ha! maiden prudery: just as it should be.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. It may be so; but she generally speaks as she thinks.
LORD WORRYMORE. Not praised it much! What faults does she find with it?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. There was something at the beginning, I forget what, which she said was very bad; and all that ball-room, bank, and bower business in the last line, she thinks is but wordy and cumbersome.
LORD WORRYMORE. Poo! poo! poo! all maiden prudery, Colonel. She will not—she will not be pleased with the poetry of a young fellow.

 
COLONEL FRANKLAND. It may be so: and how comes he to have his bust made out so cleverly? To write rhymes one day, and be crowned for it the next, is marching quick-step time on the route of reputation. Enter Lady Worrymore, followed by her maid, carrying a basket with two laurel wreaths. But here comes the Lady Paramount, and Bestower of Reputation, who should be painted with a trumpet in her mouth, like my Lady Fame.
LORD WORRYMORE. And so she ought. When her mind is unwarped by prejudice, nobody knows so well where praise is due.
LADY WORRYMORE looking round on the company, and bowing graciously. Most punctually assembled, and most welcome!    I thank ye all, and beg your pardon for being so long in joining such friends; but, in truth, I could not be satisfied with the wreaths, which have been platted and unplatted, I don't know how often. And see there pointing to the basket ; they are not yet what I could wish. Laurels for this sublime circlet should have been fresher and brighter than our poor English climate
 
did ever produce;—the myrtles for the other culled in the valley of Vaucluse itself. Indeed they are not worthy of their high destination.
LORD WORRYMORE. But from your fair hands, my Lady, is there either orator or poet who would not prize a garland of the simplest herbs?
BLOUNT. Yes, saintfoin, buttercups, or any thing.
LADY WORRYMORE. O, Mr. O'Honikin! could any one but yourself, undervaluing your own excellence, have talked of this touching solemnity! O dear! what shall I say? My heart pants within me! Tears are forcing their way into my eyes! Laying one hand on her breast affectedly, and the other on her eyes.
BLOUNT. aside to Lady Shrewdly . Forced work, indeed, I believe.
LORD WORRYMORE to Lady Shrewdly . She is really touched. This is very amiable, my dear cousin.
LADY SHREWDLY. Assuredly, my Lord, she has a true feeling of the honours belonging to genius.

 
LADY WORRYMORE.    You are right, my dear Lady Shrewdly: you understand me. O! did ever creature feel it so sensibly as I do! The very word genius sometimes makes me weep. Putting her handkerchief to her eyes affectedly.
LORD WORRYMORE. Well, my dear wife! it is very affecting; it almost brings tears into my own eyes. Running from one person to another. Is it not so?—Is it not very affecting?—Could almost cry myself. —Don't you feel it?—But come, my dear love! you delay the ceremony.
LADY WORRYMORE. It shall be delayed no longer.—Happy moment! sublime point of time! Taking a wreath from the basket. Thus, by an unworthy hand, is crowned the bust of personified Eloquence.
BLOUNT to Miss Frankland . Unveil that bust, fair lady: nothing but the hand of beauty, I suppose, must take part in such ministry.
                                          Miss Frankland removes the veil from one of the busts, as Lady Worrymore raises the garland to crown it, but starts back, uttering a faint cry, on perceiving it to be the bust of her lord.
 
LADY WORRYMORE. There is some mistake here. What a stupid blunder to bring this bust here, instead of the right one!
LORD WORRYMORE. Ha! ha! ha! it is the right one, dear lady! it is the right one.
LADY WORRYMORE. Do you think to persuade me, my Lord, that is not the very bust which was taken of yourself six months ago by Mr. Thumbit?
BLOUNT.    And is not the bust taken of his Lordship six months ago very fit to receive the honour earned by a speech written by him, probably about the same period?
LADY WORRYMORE. Fie! fie! Mr. O'Honikin! to attempt to deceive me, and wrong yourself; to pluck the eagle's feathers from your own outstretched wings, to stick them in the pinions of a—
BLOUNT. Indeed, Madam, that very eloquent speech which I had the honour of reading to your Ladyship and this good company, is no more my own than this wig taking off the wig , which I owe to the bounty of Lady Shrewdly.

 
LADY WORRYMORE staring at him. Frank Blount of Herefordshire?
BLOUNT. The same, and your very humble servant.
LADY WORRYMORE. You were always full of nonsense and tricks; but this is past endurance.
BLOUNT. My dear Madam! can't you endure that the eloquence you have so ardently admired should belong to your own accomplished lord;—should be the produce, as one may say, of your own flesh and blood?
LORD WORRYMORE. Yes, my dear life! you must pardon both him and me: for, had you known the speech to be of my composition, you would not have done it    justice, I fear.—Don't pout so, my dear! in a soothing voice, nay, don't pout. I like you for admiring what is good, let the author of it be who he may. He! he! he! he!
BLOUNT. And because the orator has received his due, must the poet go unhonoured? Mr. Clermont there is waiting to see his bust served with its garland also; and as there is no wig on his head, your Ladyship cannot be deceived in that quarter.

 
LORD WORRYMORE. And ladies, you know, my love, are reckoned better judges of poetry than speeches; though the present company, I believe, will reckon you rather a capricious, than a bad judge of either.
LADY WORRYMORE holding her head to one side, and assuming an air of diffidence. I feel,—what I ought to have acknowledged before,—that the tremour of my nerves has rendered me quite unfit, for the last twelve hours— O, much longer!—to judge of any thing. It is better for me to take care of my own fragile frame, than to concern myself with what is, perhaps, beyond the power of my poor capacity.
BLOUNT. Why, your Ladyship's capacity never showed itself more undoubtedly than on the present interesting occasion. Had you praised the speech which I had the honour of reading, as the composition of Lord Worrymore, the partiality of a    wife might have been suspected.
LORD WORRYMORE. Very true, he! he! he! Well urged, Blount.— And now, Mr. Clermont, come nearer to us, and witness the honour conferred on the writer of the sonnet.—My dear love! where is the other wreath?

 
BLOUNT following Lady Worrymore, as she turns away moodily. Nay, my Lady, don't let the writer of that beautiful sonnet be curtailed of his honours, because of my delinquency. It were an insult to the whole nine Muses to send poetry away uncrowned, when prose has been so nobly rewarded.
CLERMONT. Pray, don't urge it. Her Ladyship, perhaps, thinks such poetry unworthy to be ranked with such prose; and we ought not to—
LADY WORRYMORE. By no means, Mr. Clermont; by no means. The merit of that beautiful sonnet cannot be affected in my estimation by any adventitious circumstances.
LORD WORRYMORE. That's right, Lady Worrymore; let every thing rest on its own merit, he! he! he! That is the golden rule to go by.
BLOUNT as before. Now do you unveil that bust, Miss Frankland. Ha! you retire behind backs, and won't do it.— I'll do it myself, then, though I be but an unseemly
 
   minister in such elegancies. Gives Lady Worrymore the wreath, and then, as she is raising it, uncovers the other bust of her Lord. Put it on; put it on, my Lady. This is also the bust of the real poet who penned that delectable sonnet, and must not be defrauded of its due.
LADY WORRYMORE dashing the wreath in his face. I can bear such provoking insults no longer.
BLOUNT. Devil take it! You have scratched my face with your twigs.
LADY WORRYMORE. I wish they had all been thorn and bramble for your sake. Turns away indignantly.
LADY SHREWDLY following her soothingly. My dear Lady Worrymore! how can you take it so much to heart?
LADY WORRYMORE. And you too, Madam, have been in the plot against me. A very becoming occupation for a neighbour and a friend!
LADY SHREWDLY. My dear Ma'am! was it possible for us to
 
suppose that we prepared for you any other than an agreeable surprise? You won the heart and hand of your dear Lord by sensibility to his merit; and has that merit become less dear to you, when the glory derived from it is reflected upon yourself?
LORD WORRYMORE following Lady Shrewdly and Lady Worrymore . Ay, very sensible; very well put, my good cousin. The glory is reflected on herself, and she casts it from her, like a spoilt child who likes    every urchin's playthings better than his own. Come, come, dear life; you did think that sonnet a clever thing, and you do think it, I know you do.
LADY WORRYMORE. Keep that knowledge to yourself, then, my Lord; it will but make us both very absurd.
LORD WORRYMORE. Nay, nay, nay! Following her to the bottom of the stage, speaking to her in dumb show till they disappear amongst the company there.
CLERMONT advancing to Miss Frankland, who is now returned to the front. You did not appear very sorry for my disappointment.
MISS FRANKLAND. It cost me few tears, I confess. And you
 
take it composedly, too, considering how much enthusiastic admiration you have been deprived of at one stroke. But was there not really a sonnet of your writing sent to Lady Worrymore?
CLERMONT. I blush to say there was. But Blount's waggery has proved my friend. He gave her that written by her own husband in its stead.
MISS FRANKLAND. And what has become of it?
CLERMONT. It is burnt, gentle friend, and shall disturb you no more.
MISS FRANKLAND. And of what importance can it now be, whether I am disturbed by it or not?
CLERMONT. Of more importance than ever; since your good opinion is more necessary to my happiness than it has ever been before. I know the generosity of your feelings, which has stirred up a    quarrel between us, that I might on your change of circumstances feel myself a free man, without reproach or censure. But you will not find it so easy to get rid of me, dear Fanny, as of your fortune.

 
COLONEL FRANKLAND who has been listening behind backs. And who says she has got rid of her fortune?
CLERMONT. I beg pardon, Colonel Frankland, for alluding to such matters; but you have now found an heir in your own descendant, and it is natural that it should be so.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And I'll wager a crown, now, you both wish to have it so, that you may make a romantic match of it, and live on that bare estate on the mountains of Cumberland. But I hate romance; and unless you make up your mind to have her with the half of my moveable property as her dowry, you sha'n't have her at all.
CLERMONT. My dear Sir, the boy is your grandchild.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And if he were so ten times over, shall I ever suffer a little imp like him to be dearer to me than this generous girl? Putting their hands together. Now, keep ye good friends, and quarrel no more. And—but a truce to good advice at present; for here are our two bubbles of vanity returned again, inflated still    with air enough to keep them buoyant on the
 
whirlpool of vanity for months or years to come.
                                          Lord Worrymore and his Lady, hand-in-hand, advancing from the bottom of the stage. LORD WORRYMORE. Give me joy, give me joy, my friends! Lady Worrymore has pardoned our frolic; and I believe there is nobody here, who will think less favourably of her taste and her judgment for the mistakes of this day.
LADY SHREWDLY. Assuredly not. A wife who has taste and capacity enough to admire the talents and genius of her own husband, is most happily endowed.
LORD WORRYMORE. Well said; he—he—he! very happily endowed. To Lady Worrymore.  Don't you think so, my love?
LADY WORRYMORE gravely and demurely. I suppose she will be reckoned so.
                                         Scene closes. NOTES

ALL THE LADIES
AMANUENSIS
BARBARA
BLOUNT
CLERMONT
COLONEL FRANKLAND
FIRST SERVANT
HUGHO
LADY SHREWDLY
LADY WORRYMORE
LAURIE
LORD WORRYMORE
MANHAUNSLET
MISS FRANKLAND
MRS. BROWN
PATERSON
SECOND SERVANT
SERVANT
SIR JOHN
SIR JOHN CROFTON
THIRD SERVANT




THE SECOND MARRIAGE: 
A COMEDY. IN FIVE ACTS. 


  


Front matter 

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

MEN: 

WOMEN: 


Seabright.
Beaumont , a worthy clergyman, who is his friend and his brother-in-law. 
Lord Allcrest . 
Sir Crafty Supplecoat . 
Plausible , a schemer. 
Prowler , his knavish follower. 
William Beaumont , son to Beaumont . 
Morgan , uncle to Seabright's first wife. 
Robert.
Gardener, Sharp, and Servants, &c.
Lady Sarah , sister to Lord Allcrest . 
Sophia , daughter to Seabright . 
Mrs. Beaumont . 
Pry , Lady Sarah 's woman. 
Landlady, Servants, &c.

Scene: Seabright's house in the country, not far from London, and a small country Inn near it. 



   


Main text 

ACT I. 

SCENE I. 

A garden: the Gardener discovered at work amongst some shrubs and flowers. Enter Robert hastily, calling to him as he enters. 


Robert. 
Stop , stop, Gardener! What are you about there? My mistress's rose trees rooted out of her favourite nook thus! Get out of this spot with your cursed wheel-barrow! If there were one spark of a christian in your heart, you would pluck the last hair off your bare scalp rather than root out these shrubs. 


Gar. 
Softly and civily, Master Robert; and answer me one question first.---If I intend to remain gardener in this family, and make my pot boil and my family thrive as I have done, whether will it be wiser in me, do you think, to obey your orders or my master's? 


   



Rob. 
And did he order you to do this? 


Gar. 
As sure as I hold this spade in my hand. 


Rob. 
I should as soon have thought of tearing the turf from my mother's grave as of doing this thing. Well, well; perhaps he has forgot that she liked them. 


Gar. 
Now I rather think he remember'd, when he gave me the orders, that another lady likes them not; and a dead woman's fancy match'd against a living woman's freak, with a middle-aged widower, hear ye me, who has just pull'd the black coat off ? his back, has but a sorry chance, Robert. 


Rob. 
Ay, and he has pull'd the black coat too soon off his back. But away with it!---I'll think no more of what you say---it is impossible. 


Gar. 
May I never handle a spade again, if she did not squint to this direct spot, with her horrid looking grey eyes, the last time she walked thro' the garden, saying it was a mass of confusion that ought to be cleared away, and he gave me the orders for doing it the very next morning. 


Rob. 
Who could have believed this? Who could have believed this but a few months ago, when she rambled thro' these walks, with all her white-frock'd train gamboling round her? 


Gar. 
Nay, good Robert, don't be so down o'the mouth about it: the loss of his wife and an unlook'd-for legacy of twenty thousand pounds, may set a man's brains a working upon new plans. There is nothing very wonderful in that, man. He will get his lady-wife and the borough 

   

together, with a power of high relations, you know, and we shall all be fine folks by and bye.--- Thou wilt become master-butler or gentleman-valet, or something of that kind, and I shall be head gardener, to be sure, with a man or two to ? obey my orders: we sha'nt be the same pains-taking folks that we have been, I warrant you, when he is a parliament man. 


Rob. 
Thou'rt always looking after something for thine own advantage, and that puts all those foolish notions into thy noddle. No, no; he has lived too sweetly in his own quiet home, amongst the rustling of his own trees and the prattling of his own infants, to go now into the midst of all that shuffling and changing and making of speeches. He'll never become a parliament man. 


Gar. 
Well then, let him marry Lady Sarah for love if he please, I'll neither make nor meddle in the matter. If she keep a good house, and give good victuals and drink to the people in it, I'll never trouble my head about it. 


Rob. 
Out upon thee, man, with thy victuals and thy drink! Thou'rt worser than a hog. Well should I like, if it were not for the sake of better folks than thee, to see thy greedy chaps exercised upon her feeding. 


Gar. 
What, is she niggardly then, and so fine a lady too? 


Rob. 
Niggardly! she will pull off her wide hoop, and all them there flounces that people go to court ? in, to search over the house for the value of a candle's 

   

end, rather than any of the poor devils belonging to her should wrong her of a doit's-worth. Thou'lt have rare feeding truly when she comes amongst us. 


Gar. 
Heaven forbid it then! No wonder thou'rt anxious she should not come here. I always wonder'd what made thee so concern'd about it. 


Rob. 
And dost thou think, swine that thou art, I am concern'd for it upon this account? Thou deservest to be fed on husks and garbage all thy life for having such a thought. I, who was the friend, I may say the relation of my good mistress for thou knowest I am her foster brother and when I look upon her poor children playing about, I feel as tho' they were my own flesh and blood. It is not that I boast of the connection: God knows I am as humble as any body! 


Gar. 
Ay, no doubt; and a rare good thing it is, this same humility. I know a poor ass, grazing on the common, not far off, that to my certain knowledge is foster brother to a very great lord, and yet, I must say that for him, I never saw him prick up his ears or even shake his tail one bit the more for it in my life. By my certics! he must be a very ? meek and sober minded ass! 

???????????????????????????????????????? singing and gathering up his tools, &c. 
Take this in your hand for me, man; I'm going to another part of the garden. 

???????????????????????????????????????? holding out something for Robert to carry. 



Rob. pushing away his hand angrily. 
Take care of it yourself, fool: you would sing tho' your father were upon the gallows. 


   



Gar. 
I crave your worship's pardon! I should have whined a little, to be sure, to have been better company to you. 
looking off the stage. 
But here comes a good man who frowns upon nobody; the worthy rector of Easterdown: I'll go and bid him welcome; for he likes to see a poor fellow hold up his head before him, and speak to him like a man. 


Rob. 
You bid him welcome, indeed! stand out of the way: I'll bid him welcome myself. He is as good as my own---No matter what. He is married to my good mistress's sister; ay, and his own father christen'd me too. I'm glad he is come. You go to him indeed! 
Enter Mr. Beaumont . 

O Sir! you're welcome to this sad place. 


Bea. 
I thank you, honest Robert; how do you do? 


Rob. 
So, so; I'm obliged to you for the favour of asking. Woe is me, Sir! but this be a sad place ? since you came last among us. 


Bea. 
A sad change, indeed, my good friend, and you seem to have felt it too. You look thin and alter'd, Robert. 


Rob. 
I ha'n't been very merry of late, and that makes a body look--- 

???????????????????????????????????????? passing his hand across his eyes. 



Bea. shaking his head. 
Ay, what must thy poor master be then, since it is even so with thee? Poor man, it grieved me to think that I could not be with him on the first shock of his distress, but illness 

   

and business of importance made it impossible for me to leave Yorkshire. How does he do? I hope you look cheerfully before him, and do all that you can to comfort him. 


Rob. 
Indeed I should have been very glad, in my homely way, to have done what I could to comfort him; but, I don't know how it is, he gets on main well without, Sir. 



Bea. surprised. 
Does he?---I'm very glad to hear it. I love him for that, now: it is a noble exertion in him; he has great merit in it, truly. 


Rob. 
Humph, humph. 

???????????????????????????????????????? a pause. 


Bea. 
What were you going to say, my good Robert? 


Rob. 
Nothing, Sir; I was only clearing my throat. 


Bea. 
? How does he sleep, Robert? 


Rob. 
I can't say, Sir, not being present when he's a-bed, you know. 


Bea. 
How does he eat, then? little rest and little food must, I fear, have brought him very low. 


Rob. 
Nay, as for the matter of his eating, I can't say but I find as good a notch made in the leg of mutton, when he dines alone, as there used to be. 


Bea. 
Well, that's good. But I fear he is too much alone. 


Rob. 
No, Sir; he has dined out a pretty deal of late. He does, indeed, walk up and down the shady walk by the orchard, and talk to himself often enough. 


   




Bea. alarmed. 
Does he? that is a sign of the deepest sorrow: I must speak to him; I must put books into his hands. 


Rob. 
O Sir, there's no need of that; he has a book in his hand often enough. 


Bea. 
And what kind of books does he read? 


Rob. 
Nay, it is always the same one. 


Bea. 
Well, he can't do better: there is but one book in the world that can't be too often in a man's hand. 


Rob. 
Very true, Sir, but it is not that one, tho'.--- ? I thought as you do myself, and so I slyly look'd over his shoulder one morning to be sure of it; but I saw nothing in it but all about the great people at court, and the great offices they hold. 


Bea. 
You astonish me, Robert. His heavy loss I fear has bewildered his wits. Poor man! poor man! and all the sweet children too! 


Rob. 
Yes Sir, they---they will feel--- 


Bea. 
What would you say, my friend. 


Rob. 
Nothing, Sir. This vile neckcloth takes me so tight round the throat, an' a plague to it! 



Gar. coming forward with a broad grin. 
God bless you, Sir! I be glad to see you here. How does your good lady and master William do? He is grown a fine young gentleman now, I warrant, he, he, he, he, he! 



Rob. to Gar. angrily. 
Can't you ask a gentleman how he does, fool, without putting that damned grin upon your face? 


   



Bea. 
Why, my friend Robert, what words are these you make use of? 


Rob. 
True Sir, I should not have used them; but when a body is vexed he will be angry, and when a body is angry, good sooth! he will e'en bolt out with the first word that comes to him ? though he were a saint. 


Bea. 
Too true, Robert; but long before a body becomes a saint, he is very seldom vexed, and still seldomer angry at any thing. 


Rob. 
God bless you, Sir! I know very well I a'n't so good as I should be, and I wish from my heart I was better. 


Bea. 
Give me your hand, honest Robert; you will soon be better if you wish to be so, and it is a very pleasant progress when once it is fairly begun. 
Looking off the stage. 
I think I see your master at a distance. Good day to you! good day to you, Gardener! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt severally. 

SCENE II. 

A parlour with a door opening into the garden. Seabright and Beaumont are seen walking together in the garden. Bea. talking to Sea. as they enter. 




Bea. continuing to talk. 
I must indeed confess, my dear friend, you had every thing that this world can bestow; a moderate fortune, with health to enjoy it; the decent, modest tranquillity, of private life, and the blessings of domestic harmony; I must, indeed, confess you were a happy man. 

   


pauses and looks at Sea. who says nothing. 
Your measure of good things was compleat; it was impossible to add to it; there was no more for you to desire on this side of heaven. 

???????????????????????????????????????? pauses again. 



Sea. answering very tardily. 
I had, indeed, many of the comforts of life. 


Bea. 
Many of the comforts of life! you had every thing the heart of man can desire; and, pardon me, you could afford to lose part of your felicity, dear as that part might be, and still retain enough to make life worth the cherishing. To watch over your rising family; to mark the hopeful progress of their minds; to foster every good disposition and discourage every bad one found there: this, my friend, is a noble, an invigorating task, most worthy of a man. 


Sea. 
It is certainly the duty of every man to attend to the education of his children: their fortunes ? in the world depend upon it. 



Bea. looking displeased at him. 
Poo! their fortunes in that world from which this will appear but like a nest of worms, a hole for grubs and chrysalis's, that world which is our high and native home, depend upon it. 
walking up and down disturbed, and then returning to Sea. with a self-upbraiding look. 
Forgive me, Seabright! you know I am sometimes thus, but my spark is soon extinguished. I am glad---I ought to be glad to see you so composed. It is a noble conquest you have gain'd over your feelings, and what must it not have cost you! Give me your hand, and be not thus constrained with me: I know the weakness of 

   

human nature, and dearly do I sympathize with you. 


Sea. 
You are very kind, my friend; but you have travelled far; you must want refreshment; let me order something. 

???????????????????????????????????????? going to the door and calling a Servant , to whom he gives orders. 



Bea. aside. 
Well, there is something here I don't understand. But I am wrong, perhaps: Some people can't bear to have the subject of their sorrow touched upon: I'll talk to him of other things.--- 
Aloud to Sea. as he returns from the door. 
Your old acquaintance, Asby of Gloucestershire, called upon me a day or two before I left home, and enquired kindly after you. He is a very rich ? man now; he has purchased the great estate of Carriswood, near his native place, and is high sheriff of the country. 



Sea. becoming suddenly animated. 
What, Asby? my old school-fellow Asby? that is a great rise, by my soul! The estate of Carriswood, and high sheriff of the county! What interest has pushed him? what connexions has he made? has he speculated with his money? how has he advanced himself? 


Bea. 
I can't very well tell you: he has gone on, like many others, turning, and scraping and begging, and managing great people's matters for them, till he has become one of the most considerable men in that part of the country. 


Sea. 
He must be a clever fellow. We used to think him stupid at school, but we have been dev'lishly deceived. 


   



Bea. 
No, you have not, for he is stupid still. His brother, the poor curate of Crofton, is a clever man. 



Sea. contemptuously. 
The poor curate of Crofton! One of those clever men, I suppose, who sit with their shoes down o' the heel, by their own study fire, brooding o'er their own hoard of ideas, without ? ever being able from their parts or their learning to produce one atom's worth of good to themselves or their families. I have known many such: but let me see a man, who from narrow and unfavorable beginnings, shapes out his own way in this changing world to wealth and distinction, and, by my faith! he will be wise enough for me. 


Bea. 
My friend, you become animated: I am happy to see you so much interested in the fortune of others; it is a blessed disposition. I have something also to tell you of your old friend Malton, which I am sure will give you pleasure. 


Sea. 
What, he has got a fortune too, I suppose, and is standing for the country. 


Bea. 
No; something better than that, my friend. 


Sea. 
Ha! Well, some people get on amazingly! 


Bea. 
It is amazing, indeed, for it was altogether, hopeless. You remember his only son, the poor little boy that was so lame and so sickly? 


Sea. 
Yes, I do. 


Bea. 
Well, from some application, which I cannot remember at present, the sinews of his leg have recovered their proper tone again, and he is growing up as healthy a comely looking lad as you can see. 


   



Sea. 
O, that is what you meant---I am glad to ? hear it, certainly; a cripple in a family is not easily provided for. But pray now, let me understand this matter more perfectly. 


Bea. 
I tell you I have forgot how they treated the leg, but--- 



Sea. impatiently. 
No, no, no! What relations, what connexions had Asby to push him? a man can't get on without some assistance:---his family, I always understood, was low and distress'd. 


Bea. 
He had two or three ways of getting on, which I would not advise any friend of mine to follow him in, and the worst of them all was making what is called a convenient marriage. 



Sea. affecting to laugh. 
Ha, ha, ha! you are severe, Beaumont: many a respectable man has suffered interest to determine even his choice of a wife. Riches and honours must have their price paid for them. 


Bea. 
Trash and dirt! I would not have a disagreeable vixen to tyrannise over my family for the honours of a peerage. 


Sea. 
Well, well! people think differently upon most subjects. 


Bea. 
They do indeed; and it is not every one who thinks so delicately, and has so much reason to do ? so, upon this subject, as we have, my dear Seabright. Our wives--- 



Sea. interrupting him hastily. 
And he comes in for the county, you say? 


   



Bea. 
No, no, Seabright! you mistake me: high sheriff of the county, I said. How you do interest yourself in the fortunes of this man! 


Sea. 
And what should surprise you in this? By heaven there is nothing so interesting to me as to trace the course of a prosperous man through this varied world! First he is seen like a little stream, wearing its shallow bed through the grass; circling, and winding, and gleaning up its treasures from every twinkling rill as it passes: farther on the brown sand fences its margin, the dark rushes thicken on its side: farther on still, the broad flags shake their green ranks, the willows bend their wide boughs o'er its course: and yonder, at last, the fair river appears, spreading his bright waves to the light! 



Bea. staring strangely on him, then turning away some paces, and shaking his head ruefully 
Poor man! poor man! his intellects are deranged: he is not in his senses. 

Enter a Servant . 




Sea. to Ser.  
Very well. 
to Bea.  
Let us go to the breakfast room, Beaumont, and you'll find ? something prepared for you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? As they are about to go out, the children appear at a distance in the garden. 



Bea. looking out. 
Ha! yonder are the children! Blessings on them! I must run and speak to them first. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit into the garden to the children. 



Sea. to himself, looking contemptuously after Bea.  
Ay, go to the children! thou art only fit company for them! To come here with his comfort and his 

   

condolence full eight months and a-half after her death ---he is a mere simpleton! His wonderful delicacy too about interested marriages---he is worse than a simpleton! And my only business now, forsooth! must be to stay at home and become schoolmaster to my own children!---he is an absolute fool! 
turning round and seeing the servant still standing at the door. 
Have you enquired at the village which of the inns my Lord Lubberford stops at on his way to town? 


Ser. 
Yes, Sir; but they don't know. 


Sea. 
But they must know! Go and make farther enquiries, for I must pay my respects to his Lordship as he passes. Were the fruit and the flowers carried to Lady Sarah this morning? 


Ser. 
I don't know, Sir. 


Sea. 
Run to the gardener, and put him in mind of it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 

SCENE III. 

A library. Enter Seabright , who walks several times slowly across the stage as if deeply engaged in his own mind, then stops short with a considerable pause. 



Sea. 
I am now upon the threshold of distinction, and with one step more I cross it. On this side lies spiritless obscurity; on that, invigorating honour. 
pauses. 
Member of Parliament! there is magic in the words, and of most powerful operation.---Let that man find a place elsewhere; why should I squeeze myself and every body round me to make 

   

room for him? Sir, he's a Member of Parliament. ---Let that fool hold his tongue there; why do we silently listen to all his prosing stuff? Sir, he's a Member of Parliament.---What; bells ringing, children huzzaing, corporation men sweating at this rate, to welcome that poor looking creature to your town? To be sure; he's a Member of Parliament. ---Ay, so it is! I too have mixed with the ignoble crowd to stare upon men thus honoured. I have only now to over-step the bounds, and be myself the very thing I gazed at. 
pausing again. 
---There is indeed a toll, a price of entrance that must be paid, and my heart stands back from it; but there is no other way than this, and what I would wear I must purchase. O it is well worth its price! To be but known and named as filling such a place in society brings pleasure with it. And in the eyes of ? our early friends too---Methinks I can see at this moment every curious face in my native village gathering about the letter-boy, as he sets out upon his rounds, to look with grinning admiration upon my first franks. "Free, Seabright;" ha, ha, ha! 

???????????????????????????????????????? laughing to himself and rubbing his hands together with great complacency. 
Enter Robert . 




Sea. turning round shortly like one who is caught. 
What brings you here, sirrah? 


Rob. 
You desired me to tell you, Sir, when Miss Seabright returned from her walk. 



Sea. with his countenance changed. 
And is she so soon returned? 


   



Rob. 
Yes Sir, and I have told her you wish to speak with her. 


Sea. 
You have told her---I wish---I looked not for her so soon---I wish you had not--- 


Rob. 
Sir! 


Sea. 
Begone! begone! and say I am waiting for her. 
Exit Rob. stealing a look of observation at his master as he goes out. 
---Ah! here comes the hard pull! here comes the sticking place! I should have prepared her for this before, but my heart would not suffer me. O that I had employed some one else to tell her! She little thinks of this! I hear her coming 
listening; while children's voices are heard without. 
What, she is bringing the children with her! I hear the little one prating as he ? goes. O God! I cannot---I cannot! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit running out with much agitation. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Sophia , carrying a little boy on her back, and an elder boy and girl taking hold of her gown. 



Soph. to the little one . 
You have had a fine ride and a long ride, have you not? 


Little One. 
Yesh, tit. 


Soph. 
Come down then, boy, for your horse is tired. 


Little One. 
No, tit. 


Soph. 
No, tit! but you must tho' 
setting him down. 
Stand upon your fat legs there, and tell me what I'm to have for all this trouble of carrying you. What am I to have, urchin? 


Little One. 
Kish. 


   




Soph. after kissing him affectionately. 
And what am I to have for these comfits I have saved for you? 


Little One. 
Kish. 



Soph. kissing him again. 
And what am I to have for the little dog I bought for you this morning? 


Little One. 
Kish. 


Soph. 
What, kish again? Kish for every thing? 
kissing him very tenderly. 
O you little rogue! you might buy the whole world for such money as this, if every body loved you as I do. Now children, papa is not ready to see us yet, I find, so in the mean time, I'll divide the little cake I promised ? you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? taking a little cake from her work-bag and dividing it; whilst Robert , peeping in at the door and seeing Seabright not there, ventures in, and stands for a little while looking tenderly upon Soph. and the children. 


Rob. 
God bless all your sweet faces! 


Soph. 
What do you want here, good Robert? 


Rov. 
Nothing---nothing.---God bless you all, my pretty ones! 
listening. 
I hear him coming. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit, looking piteously upon them, as he goes off. 


Soph. 
I hear papa coming. 


Little Girl. 
I'll run and meet him. 


Eldest Boy. 
Don't Emma! he does not like to play with us now; it is troublesome to him. 


Little Girl. 
When mama was alive he play'd with us. 


Soph. 
Hush! my good girl. 

   

Enter Seabright . 

We have been waiting for you, papa; Robert told us you wanted to see us all together. 


Sea. 
Did Robert tell you so? I wanted to see you alone, Sophia, but since it is so, the others may remain. I have got something to say to you. 


Soph. 
You look very grave, my dear Sir: have I offended you? 


Eldest Boy. 
It was I who broke the china vase, so don't be angry with her for that. 


Sea. 
My brave boy! it is distress, and not anger, that makes me grave. 


Soph. 
And are you distress'd, papa? O don't be distress'd! we will do every thing that we can ? to please you. I know very well we can't make you so happy as when mama was alive; but we will be such good children! we will obey you, and serve you, and love you so much, if you will but play with us, and look upon us again as you used to do! 



Sea. softened. 
My dear girl, I wish I could make you all happy: I wish to raise your situation in the world above the pitch of my present confined abilities: I wish--- 
stops and is much embarrassed. 



Soph. kissing his hand. 
My dear, dear father! you say that I am your dear girl, and I promise you you shall find me a good one. I want no better fortune in the world, than to live with you and be useful to you. I can overlook the household matters, and order every thing in the family as you would like to have it. I want no better fortune 

   

than this: I shall be a happy girl and a proud girl too, if you will put confidence in me. 



Sea. taking her hand tenderly. 
My sweet child! this would be a dull and sombre life for a young girl like you: you ought now to be dressed and fashioned like other young people, and have the advantage of being introduced to the world by those who--- 


Soph. 
? O no! I don't care whether my gown be made of silk or of linen: and as for being dull, never trouble your head about that; we shall find a way to get the better of it. Do you know, papa,--- but I am almost ashamed to tell it you.--- 


Sea. 
What is it, my dear. 


Soph. 
I have been learning to play at backgammon: for you know mama and you used to play at it of a winter evening; and I'll play with you, if you will allow me. 


Sea. 
O God! O God! this is too much! 

???????????????????????????????????????? turns from them in great agitation, and running to the opposite side of the room, stands leaning his back against the wall, whilst Sophia and the children gather round him. 


Soph. 
My dear father! what is the matter? 


Eldest Boy. 
Are you not well, papa? 


Sea. 
I am well enough! I am well enough! but I have something to tell you, and I cannot tell it. 


Soph. 
For God's sake let me know what it is! 


Sea. 
You must know it: it is necessary that you should. I am--- 

???????????????????????????????????????? pauses. 


Soph. 
A bankrupt. 


   



Sea. 
No, no, no! I am going to be married.--- 
 Sophia staggers some paces back, and stands like one perfectly stupified. 
What is the matter, Sophia? are you going to faint? 


Soph. 
No, I sha'n't faint. 


Sea. 
Be not so overcome with it, my dear child! ? it is for the good of my children I marry. 
pauses and looks at her, but she is silent. 
You, and all children in your situation, look upon these matters with a prejudiced eye. It is my great regard for you that determines me to take this step. 
pauses, but she is silent. 
Do you hear me? Will you not speak to me? 


Soph. 
O my poor mother! little did I think when I kiss'd your cold hands, that you would so soon be forgotten! 


Sea. 
No more of this, my dear! no more of this! It is improper; it is painful to me. I have not forgotten ---I love---I respect---I adore her memory: but I am engaged---it is necessary---your interest, is concerned in it, my dear children; and I know, my good Sophia, you will not add to your father's distress by stubborn and undutiful behaviour. 


Soph. 
O no, my dear Sir! if you love and adore her memory I am satisfied. Yet, if you do, how can you---O how can you!---I will say no more: God bless you and give you a good wife! 
weeping. 
But she will never be so good as my mother: she will never love you as my mother did. 


Sea. 
Forbear, my good girl! I know it very well; and I don't marry now to be beloved. But Lady ? Sarah is a very good woman, and will make me as 

   

happy as I can expect to be: she is sister to Lord Allcrest, you know, and is related to the first people of the country. 


Soph. 
Good heaven, Sir! you can't mean to marry Lady Sarah: all the world knows how ill-temper'd she is. 


Eldest Boy. 
What, that lady with the cunning-looking nose, and the strange staring eye-brows? If she come into this house I'll cast my top at her. 


Soph. 
Hold your tongue; George! papa is not so hard hearted as to set such a woman over us. Come, come, children! gather round and hold up your little hands to him: he will have pity upon you. 
the children gather round, and Sophia , putting the hands of the youngest child together and holding them up, kneels down before him. 
O Sir! have pity on them! We have nobody to plead for us, and I cannot speak. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Robert with his face all blubbered, and throwing himself upon his knees by the children, holds up his hands most piteously. 


Rob. 
O, Sir! 



Sea. bursting into a violent rage. 
What, sirrah! have you been listening at the door? Go from my presence this moment! 


Soph. 
Dear Sir! be not angry with him! 



Sea. putting her away. 
No, no! let us have no more of this nonsense: I have listen'd too long to it ? already. 

???????????????????????????????????????? breaks from them and exit. 


Rob. 
I wish my head had been cut off before I had come in with my ill-timed assistance! Curse 

   

upon my stupid pate! I deserve to be hang'd for it. 
beating his head and grasping his hair. 
O my pretty ones! I sent you all to him that you might work on his heart, for I knew what he wanted to say well enough, and yet I must needs thrust in my silly snout amongst you to mar all! For a man that can read books and cast accounts, and all that, to do such a trick! I deserve to be cudgel'd! 


Soph. 
Don't be so angry at yourself, Robert: you meant it well, and you have always been so good to us! 


Rob. 
Good to you! I love you like my own flesh and blood, every one of you; and if any body dare to do you wrong, I'll---no matter what. 
clenching his fist and nodding significantly. 
He may turn me off if he please; but I'll not quit the neighbourhood: I'll watch over you, my pretty ones; and hang me if any one shall hurt a hair of your heads! 


Soph. 
I thank you, Robert: but don't tell any body: that would not be right, you know. Come, children; you shall go with me to my own room. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Sophia and children by one side, and exit Robert by the other, looking after them with tenderness and pity. 
END OF THE FIRST ACT.


   


ACT II. 

SCENE I. 

Before the front of Seabright 's house. 

Enter Plausible and Prowler . 



Plau. 
Do you wait for me in that farther walk yonder, till I come from visiting my subject. 


Pro. 
Well, God grant he prove a good subject! we are woundily in want of one at present. 


Plau. 
Don't lose courage, man; there is always a certain quantity of good and of bad luck put into every man's lot, and the more of the one that has past over his head, the more he may expect of the other. Seabright has a fortune to speculate with, and some turn, as I have been told, for speculation: he is just launching into a new course of life, and I have a strong presentiment that I shall succeed with him. 


Pro. 
Now away with your presentiments! for we have never yet had any good luck that has not come pop upon our heads like a snow-ball, from the very opposite point to our expectation: but he has got an unexpected legacy lately; and I have observed that a sum coming in this way, to a man of a certain disposition, very often plays the part of a decoy-bird to draw away from him all the rest of his money: there I rest my hopes. 


   



Plau. 
Why you talk as if I were going to ruin him, instead of encreasing his fortune by my advice. 


Pro. 
? I have seen ruin follow every man that has been favour'd with your advice, as constantly as the hind legs follow the fore legs of a horse, and therefore I cannot help thinking there must be some connexion between them. However, I don't pretend to reason, Plausible: it might only be some part of their bad luck that happen'd just at those times to be passing over their heads; and they have always, in the mean time, supplied you and your humble follower with money for our immediate wants. 


Plau. 
Well, hold your tongue, do! 
knocks at the door, which is opened by Robert . 
Is your master at home? 


Rob. 
Yes. 


Plau. 
Can he be spoken with? 


Rob. 
No, Sir, he can't see you at present. 


Plau. 
At what hour can I see him? 


Rob. 
I don't know, Sir. 


Plau. 
Is he so much engaged? But you seem sad, my friend: has any thing happened? You had a funeral in the house some months ago? 


Rob. 
Yes, Sir; but it is a wedding we have got in it at this bout. 


Plau. 
I had the honour of calling on Mr. Seabright ? yesterday morning, but he was not at home. 


   



Rob. 
Yes, Sir; he has been at the borough of Crockdale to be chair'd, and the parish of Upperton to be married; and he returned last night--- 


Pro. 
Bridegroom and Member of Parliament! 


Rob. 
Keep your jokes till they are ask'd for. 


Pro. 
They would be stale jokes indeed, then. 



Plau. to Pro.  
Hold your tongue, pray. 
to Rob.  
He is engaged? 


Rob. 
Yes, Sir; he is with the bride and the company, in the garden, at breakfast. 


Plau. 
Well, I shan't disturb him at present.--- Here is a crown for you: you will recollect my face again when you see it? I'll call again very soon. 



Pro. aside. 
Mercy upon us! the last crown we have in the world given away on such a chance! It shan't go tho'. 


Rob. 
O yes, Sir, I'll recollect you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Plausible . 



Pro. lingering behind. 
Don't shut the door yet. Hark you, my good Mr. John, for I know your name very well! 


Rob. 
My name is Robert. 


Pro. 
Yes, Robert I said. 


Rob. 
Did you so, truly! have not I ears in my ? head? 


Pro. 
Assuredly Sir, and ears, let me tell you, that will hear good news soon, if you will be counsell'd by me. 


Rob. 
Anan? 


Pro. 
Have you never a mind to put out a little money to advantage? a guinea or so, now, in such 

   

a way as to return to you again with fifteen or twenty of his yellow-coated brethren at his back? 


Rob. 
Poo with your nonsense! I have sent two or three guineas out upon such fools errands already. 


Pro. 
And did they come back empty handed to you? 


Rob. 
No, by my faith! for they never came back at all. 


Pro. 
O lud, lud! there be such cheats in this world, they frighten honest folks from trying their fortune. I have got a crown of my own, just now, and with another crown put to it by any good hearted fellow that would go halves with me in the profit, I have an opportunity of making a good round sum, at present, in a very honest way, that would almost make a man of me at once: but I'm sure I don't advise you to do it; for prudence is a great virtue; prudence is a very great virtue. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Bell rings, and Robert stands hesitating. 


Rob. 
? Hang it! a crown is no great matter after all. There it is 
giving him the crown whilst the bell rings again. 
How that plaguy bell rings! When you get the money for me, you'll know where to call? 


Pro. 
Never fear! when I get the money for you, I'll find my way back again, I warrant you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE II. 

A garden, with a temple seen at some distance, in which are discovered Lady Sarah, Sophia , Mr. and Mrs. Beaumont , and William Beaumont , as if seated after breakfast; whilst Gardener and one or two of the Servants skulk near the front of the stage, behind some bushes, looking at them. 



Gar. 
Bride indeed! she's as unlovely a looking piece of goods as ever I look'd upon. See how she stares at every thing about her, and curls up her nose like a girkin! I'll warrant you she'll be all thro' my kitchen grounds by-and-by, to count over my cabbages. 


First Ser. 
Hold your tonge, man: we're too long here: see, they are all breaking up now, and some of them will be here in a trice. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Servants . 

???????????????????????????????????????? The company come out from the temple, and Mr. and Mrs. Beaumont advance to the front of the stage, talking together earnestly. 



Bea. continuing to talk. 
Nay, my dear, you are prejudiced and severe; it did not strike me that she behaved to you with so much forbidding coldness. She has an ungracious countenance to be sure, but now and then when it relaxes, she looks as if she had some good in her. 


Mrs. B. 
Yes, Charles, you find always some good in every one of God's creatures. 


Bea. 
And there is some good in every one of God's creatures, if you would but look for it. 


   



Mrs. B. 
I'm sure those who can find it out in her have a quicker discernment than I can pretend to. How unlucky it was that we came to the house last night, without enquiring before hand the state of the family! I thought I should have fainted ? when they told me of the marriage; and when I saw that creature in my sweet sister's place! 


Bea. 
I pitied you, my dear Susan, very much, indeed I did; but it would have look'd pettish and unforgiving in us to have gone away again at that late hour; and I think we must stay with them till to-morrow. For the children's sake we must endeavour to be on good terms with them. But here come William and Sophia. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter William Beaumont and Sophia , talking as they enter. 


Wil. 
You like the yellow-streak'd carnations best? 


Soph. 
Yes, I think they are the prettiest, tho' we have but very few of them. 


Wil. 
O then I'll make our gardener sow a whole bushel of carnation-seed when I get home, that we may have a good chance, at least, of raising some of the kind you admire. And what else can I do for you, Sophy? Shall I copy some of my friend's verses for you? or send you some landscapes for your drawing-book? or---did not you say you should like to have a rocking-horse for little Tony? 


Soph. 
Indeed you are very good, cousin. 


   



Wil. 
No, no! don't say that: there is no goodness at all in doing any thing for you. 



Soph. going up to Mrs. B. who puts her arm affectionately round her. 
My dear aunt! 


Wil. 
? Ah, mother! see how tall she has grown since we saw her last, and how dark her hair is now. 



Mrs. B. archly. 
You like fair hair best, I believe, William. 


Wil. 
I like fair hair! I can't endure it! 



Mrs. B. smiling. 
Well, well, you need not be so vehement in expressing your dislike. 


Bea. 
Here comes Lady Sarah to join us: this at least is civil, you will confess. 



Lady S. coming forward to join them. 
You are fond, Ma'am, I perceive, of the shade, from prefering this side of the garden. 
formally to Mrs. B. who coldly bows assent. 
It is a very pleasant morn-for travelling, Mr. Beaumont. 


Bea. 
Yes, Madam, it is a very pleasant morning for travelling. 


Lady S. 
I'm sorry, however, that you will have so much dust on your road to town. 



Soph. to Mrs. B.  
Why you don't go to day, aunt? I thought you were to stay longer. 


Mrs. B. 
No, my dear, we go this morning. 

???????????????????????????????????????? looking significantly to Beaumont . 


Lady S. 
Would not the cool of the evening be more agreeable? 


Mrs. B. 
No, Ma'am, the coolness of this morning has been quite enough to induce us to set out ? immediately. 


   

Enter Servant . 




Ser. to Lady S.  
Some poor people from the village are come to wish your Ladyship health and happiness. 



Lady S. ungraciously. 
I am obliged to them.--- What do they mean? Ay, ay! tell them I am obliged to them. You need not wait; that is all. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Ser. whilst Mrs. B. smiles significantly to her husband. 


Soph. 
I wonder if my old friend, Huskins, be amongst them: I'll run and see. 

???????????????????????????????????????? going to run out. 


Lady S. 
Perhaps, Miss Seabright, will do me the honour to consult me upon what friendships are proper for her to cultivate. 



Mrs. B. seeing Sophia distressed. 
If your Ladyship will permit us, she shall retire with me for a little. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Mrs. B. and Sophia. 



Wil. aside to his father, as they are about to follow them. 
What an ugly witch it is! must we leave Sophia with her? 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Beaumont and William B. Lady Sarah looking after them suspiciously. 
Enter Seabright . 




Lady S. turning to him with affected sprightliness. 
So you have been upon the watch, I suppose, and will not suffer me to stroll thro' these shady walks alone: I am positively to have no time to myself. 


Sea. 
You don't call me an intruder, I hope? 


Lady S. 
Indeed if you become very troublesome, I don't know what I may call you. He, he, he! 
laughing foolishly. Seabright putting his hand up to 

   

the side of her hat, she pushes it away with pretended coyness. 
How can you be so childish! he, he, he! 



Sea. gravely. 
? Won't you let me pick a caterpillar from your ribband? 



Lady S. looking foolish and disappointed. 
O! is that it? I am much obliged to you: but you are always so good, so tenderly attentive to me! Indeed this little hand was well bestow'd upon you, Seabright: I wish it had convey'd to you a better gift when it gave away myself. 

???????????????????????????????????????? thrusting out a great brown hand to him. 



Sea. raising it to his lips with affected tenderness. 
What could it possibly convey, my dear Lady Sarah, more--- 
stopping short as he is about to kiss it. 
It that a family ring upon your finger? 


Lady S. 
Yes, it was my mother's: why so? 


Sea. 
The arms of the Highcastles' are upon it: Lord Highcastle then is your relation? 


Lady S. 
I am nearly related to him. 



Sea. with his countenance brightening. 
I did not know this: by my soul I am glad of it! He is in credit with the minister: you are on good terms with him, I hope. 


Lady S. 
Yes, I have always taken pains to be upon terms with him. 


Sea. 
I dare say you have; I dare say you have: you have so much prudence, and so many good qualities, my dear love! 

???????????????????????????????????????? kissing her hand with great alacrity. 


Lady S. 
O it is all your blind partiality! 
putting her hand tenderly upon his shoulder. 
? Do you know, 

   

my dear Mr. Seabright, that coat becomes you very much: I wish you would always wear that colour. 


Sea. 
I'll wear any thing you like, my dear. But, by-the-bye, my constituents at Crockdale, have a manufacture of woollen in the town: I must buy two or three hundred yards of their stuff from them, I believe, lest I should have occasion to be elected again. 



Lady S. taking her hand eagerly off his shoulder. 
Two or three hundred yards of stuff from them! Why the cheapest kind they make is eightpence-halfpenny a yard: only consider what that will come to. 


Sea. 
No very great sum! 


Lady S. 
I am surprised to hear you say so! Now I should think if you were to send the mayor and aldermen a haunch of venison now and then when it comes in your way, and the earliest information of any great public events that may occur, it would be a more delicate and pleasing attention. 


Sea. 
Well, well, my dear Lady Sarah, don't let us fall out about it. 


Lady S. 
I am perfectly good humoured, I assure you; but you are so--- 


Sea. 
? Yonder is your maid coming to speak to you, I'll leave you. 


Lady S. 
Indeed she has nothing to say: I won't suffer her to break in upon our tender conversation. 


   



Sea. 
But I must go to give directions about accommodating Lord Allcrest and his friend. They will be here soon. 


Lady S. 
Nay, there you have no occasion to give yourself any trouble: leave every thing of that kind to me: you are too profuse, and too careless, in every thing. 


Sea. 
I may at least go to the stables and give my groom orders to provide oats for their horses. 


Lady S. 
I have a very good receipt in my receipt book for feeding horses upon the refuse of a garden. 



Sea. shaking his head, and breaking away from her. 
No, no! that won't do. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 
Enter Pry with a busy face. 



Lady S. 
What brings you here, Pry? Did not you see Mr. Seabright with me? 


Pry. 
I protest, my Lady, I have been looking at so many things this morning, I can't tell what is before my eyes. 


Lady S. 
You have look'd over every thing then as I desired you: and I hope you have done it as if it were to satisfy your own curiosity. 


Pry. 
? To be sure, my Lady; and I might say so with truth too, for nothing does my heart so much good as looking thro' all them there places. And O dear, my Lady! the chests, and the wardrobes, and the larders, and the store-rooms, that I have look'd into! but that cunning fellow, Robert, would not let me into the wine-cellar tho'. 


   



Lady S. 
And you are sure you let them understand it was all to please your own curiosity. 


Pry. 
To be sure; and I was glad I could speak the truth too, for I never does tell a lie but when I cannot get a turn served without it. I remember, my Lady, you told me long ago that this was the best rule; and I have always held you up, my Lady, for an ensample. Lord have mercy upon their souls that will tell you over a pack of lies for no other purpose but to make people laugh! And there is all your writers of books too, full of stories from one end to the other, what will become of them, poor sinners? 


Lady S. 
Never trouble your head about them: what have you seen? 


Pry. 
O dear me! the sheets and the table-linen, and the pickles, and the sweetmeats, and the hams, and the bacon that I have seen? 


Lady S. 
? Indeed, Pry! 


Pry. 
But do you know, my Lady, there is a curious place in the house. 


Lady S. 
What is it, pray? 


Pry. 
A closet where they keep cordials for poor people. 



Lady S. sourly. 
Humph. 


Pry. 
It was kept for that purpose by the late Mrs. Seabright, and this young lady, I am told, is as fond of it as her mother was. 


Lady S. 
Humph---every body has some maggot or other. 


   



Pry. 
Certainly, my Lady, but this is a very strange one tho'. For you must know, my Lady, I thought no harm just to taste one of the bottles myself, thinking it might be some pennyroyal-water or blackberry-wine, or such things as charitable ladies give away; but I protest it is as good liquor as any gentlewoman would chuse to keep for her own use. 


Lady S. 
I believe it has run in your head, Pry? 


Pry. 
No, no, my Lady; whatever I may do by myself when I have a pain in my stomach, or such like, for nobody can help afflictions when it pleases heaven to send them, I never takes more than is creditable ? before people.---And, O my Lady! the pans of milk, and the butter, that I have seen in the dairy! And I assure you, my Lady, the servants make good use of it: they make spare of nothing: the very kitchen maids have cream to their tea. 


Lady S. 
Well, well; we shall see how long this rioting will last. 


Pry. 
And I have been in the garden and the orchard too---But stop! I hear a noise in the bushes. 



Lady S. looking round alarmed. 
Why did you talk so loud, you gossiping fool? Come with me into the house. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Lady Sarah and Pry , looking round alarmed. 


   


???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Gardener , creeping from amongst the bushes, and shaking his fist and making faces after them. 


Gar. 
I have been in the garden and the orchard too! hang'd jade! we shall see who comes off winner at last. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

SCENE III. 

Enter Seabright followed by Robert . 




Sea. speaking as he enters. 
And he'll call again, you say? his name is Plausible. 


Rob. 
Yes, Sir; he is a very grave sensible looking man. 


Sea. 
And has nobody else call'd? 


Rob. 
No, Sir. 


Sea. 
No letters for me? 


Rob. 
No, Sir. 


Sea. 
Nobody applying for franks? 


Rob. 
No, Sir. 



Sea. aside. 
Stupid dolts! 
aloud. 
So much the better. Be in the way when I call for you. 
Exit Robert . 
Well, this is strange enough: no body soliciting; no body coming to pay their court to me; no body asking me even for a frank: it is very strange! 
after musing some time. 
Hah! but there is a bad spirit in men, which makes them always unwilling at first to acknowledge the superiority of him who has been more nearly on a level with themselves. It is only when they see him firmly establish'd, and advancing in the path of honours, that they are forced to respect him. 
after walking across 

   

the stage proudly. 
And they shall see me advance. I am not a man to stop short at such beginnings ? as these, after the high connexions I have made: I feel that I am born for advancing. The embarrassment of public affairs at present, offers my activity a fair field for exertion. 
A great noise and clamour heard without. 
What is that? Who waits there? 
Enter Robert . 

What a cursed clamour and noise is this I hear? 


Rob. 
Only my Lady, Sir, who has been all over the house with Mrs. Pry, and laying down some prudent regulations for the family. 


Sea. 
And what have the servants to say to that? 


Rob. 
A pretty deal, Sir: they are no wise mealy mouthed about the matter; and they're all coming to your honour with it in a body. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The noise without still coming nearer. 


Sea. 
Don't let the angry fools come to me; I'll have nothing to do with it. Go tell them so. 


Rob. 
Very well, Sir; I'll be sure to tell them, he, he, he! 


Sea. 
What, sirrah! is it a joke for you? 


Rob. 
I didn't laugh, Sir. 



Sea. very angry. 
But you did, you damn'd fool! 



Voices without. 
I'll tell his honour of it, that I will. His honour is a good master, and has always kept his house like a gentleman. 


Sea. 
Did not I tell you not to let those angry ? ideots come to me. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit by the opposite side from the noise, in great haste, whilst Robert pushes 

   

back the crowd of servants, who are seen pressing in at the door. 


Rob. 
Get along all of you! his honour won't be disturb'd. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt; a great clamour heard as they retire. 

SCENE IV. 

Lady Sarah 's dressing-room. Enter Lady Sarah , followed by Sophia , carrying a work-basket in her hand, which she sets upon a work-table and sits down to work. 




Lady S. sitting down by her. 
Now I hope, Miss Seabright, I may flatter myself with having more of your company this morning than you generally favour me with. If Lord Allcrest does not come at an early hour, we shall have time for a good deal of work. When a young lady is industrious, and is not always reading nonsensical books, or running up and down after children, or watering two or three foolish flower-pots on her window, she can do a great many things for herself, that enable her to appear better dress'd than girls who are more expensive. 
pausing. 
You don't answer me. 


Soph. 
Indeed, Ma'am, I had better not, for I don't know what to say. 


Lady S. 
You are a very prudent young lady, indeed, to make that a reason for holding your tongue. 


Soph. 
It is a reason, indeed, which elder ladies do not always attend to. 


   



Lady S. 
What gown is that you have put on today? It makes you look like a child from the nursery.---Mr. Supplecoat is to accompany Lord Allcrest, who is a very promising young man, of good expectations, and I could have wish'd you ? had dress'd to more advantage. There is a young friend of mine, scarcely a year older than yourself, who is just going to be married to one of the best matches in the country; and it is of great importance to have a daughter of a large family well and early settled in life. 



Soph. looking very much surprized. 
O how different! My poor mother used to say, that young women ought not to be married too early, but wait till they had sense to conduct themselves at the head of a family. 


Lady S. 
Some of them would wait till they were pretty well wrinkled then. 


Soph. 
It must be confessed that some, who do wait till they are pretty well wrinkled, are fain at last to marry without it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Voices heard without. 



Lady S. rising quickly. 
It is my brother's voice: he is come early. 

Enter Seabright , Lord Allcrest , and Sir Crafty Supplecoat . 



Lady S. 
My dear brother, I am rejoiced to see you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? holding out her hand to Lord Allcrest , who salutes her, and then courtesying very graciously to Sir Crafty . 


Lord A. 
I am happy to see you look so well, sister. 


   



Sir C. 
Lady Sarah looks as a bride ought to look, fair and chearful. 


Lady S. 
And Mr. Supplecoat talks as a courtier ? ought to talk, I need not say how. 


Lord A. 
I beg pardon! let me have the pleasure of introducing Sir Crafty Supplecoat to your Ladyship. 


Lady S. 
Every new honour that Sir Crafty acquires must give me pleasure. And permit me to introduce to your Lordship, Mr. Seabright's---I mean my daughter, who has many good qualities to make her worthy of your esteem. 

???????????????????????????????????????? presenting Sophia to Lord All. and then to Sir Crafty , who afterwards modestly shrinks back, behind Lady S.  



Sea. aside to Lady S. pulling her by the sleeve. 
What, is he made a baronet? 



Lady S. aside. 
Yes. 



Sea. aside. 
A baronet, not a knight? 



Lady S. aside. 
No, no! a baronet, certainly. 



Sea. aloud. 
Permit me again to say how happy I am to see your Lordship in this house: I hope you and Sir Crafty will not run away from us so soon as your letter gave us reason to fear. 


Lord A. 
You are very obliging, my good Sir; but my time, as you may suppose, is of some little importance at present, and not altogether at my own command. 


Sir C. 
His Lordship's time has been so long devoted to the public, that he begins to believe it has a right to it. 


   




Lord A. affecting humility. 
Why, I have been ? placed, without any merit of my own, in a situation which gives my country some claims upon me: ever since the time of Gilbert, third Earl of Allcrest, the chiefs of my family have pursued one uniform line of public conduct. 


Sir C. 
For which they have been rewarded with one uniform stream of ministerial approbation.--- Changes of men and of measures have never been able to interrupt the happy and mutual uniformity. 


Lord A. 
I believe, indeed, without the imputation of vanity, I may boast of it. The imputation of pride I am not so anxious to avoid: it more naturally attaches itself to that dignified stability; that high integri---I mean that public virt---I should say--- 
mumbling indistinctly to himself 
which my family has been conspicuous for. 


Sir C. 
Pride is a fault that great men blush not to own---it is the enobled offspring of self-love; tho', it must be confess'd, grave and pompous vanity, like a fat plebeian in a robe of office, does very often assume its name. 


Lord A. 
Ha, ha, Sir Crafty! you have a pleasant imagination: one can see that you sometimes read books. 


Sir C. 
I would rather follow your example, my ? Lord, in the more agreeable study of men. No; I very seldom take a book in my hand, unless it be patronised by some great name, or have the honour, as has been the case with one of our best works lately, to be dedicated to your Lordship. 


   



Lord A. 
I am obliged to you, Supplecoat; I am sure I am very happy if a name of so little importance as mine can be of any use to the learned world. We all owe learning a great deal. 


Sir C. 
I am sure the patronage of your Lordship's name is a full recompense to learning for all the obligations you owe her. 



Lord A. bowing graciously, and then turning to Seabright , as if modestly to interrupt the stream of his own praise. 
Mr. Seabright, I must have a conversation with you in your library, when you can bestow as much leisure upon me. Most of our elections are already decided, and the ensuing parliament bids fair to be as united and as meritorious as its predecessor. In those places where I have the honour to possess some little influence, the constitution, the government, or ministry---that is to say the same thing, you know, will find hearty and zealous supporters: I think I may depend at least on the member for Crockdale. 

???????????????????????????????????????? bowing. 


Sea. 
I hope I shall always be found to merit the friendship and alliance I have the honour of bearing ? to your Lordship. 



Lord A. drawing back coldly. 
Friendship is always the strongest tye, Mr. Seabright: indeed the only one that is now held in any consideration, or indeed ever mention'd. 



Sea. mortified and drawing back also. 
I am ready to attend you, my Lord, whenever you please: I shall have the honour of shewing you the way to my library. 


   



Lord A. 
I am infinitely obliged to you. Will you go with us too, Sir Crafty? You have a list of the voters for Underwall in your pocket. The ladies will excuse us. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Lord All. Sir Crafty , and Sea. who goes out with them and re-enters almost immediately. 



Sea. to Lady S.  
His Lordship sent me back to borrow your spectacles. 


Lady S. 
Spectacles! I use no such thing. 


Sea. 
He says you do. 


Lady S. 
O yes, there is a particular kind which I sometimes look thro' to examine any thing very minutely. 

???????????????????????????????????????? After receiving the spectacles and going to the door, he suddenly stops and turns back. 


Sea. 
But is it your brother's interest that has made Supplecoat a baronet? 


Lady S. 
I dare say it is. 


Sea. 
Yes, yes! I make no doubt of it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit, hurrying away. 



Lady S. to Soph. angrily. 
What made you, ? child, skulk behind backs so, like a simpleton? ---You can be fluent enough when there is no occasion for it, and when you ought to speak you have not a word to say for yourself. This is true nursery breeding. 


Soph. 
Indeed, Madam, you may thank yourself for it; for after what you said to me, before they arrived, about Sir Crafty Supplecoat and marrying, I could not bear to look at him; and every time he look'd at me, I felt strange and mortified, just 

   

as if I had been set there to be look'd at. He is the most disagreeable man I ever saw in my life. 


Lady S. 
Don't be uneasy; you have little chance, I'm afraid, of being molested by him. But I forget, I must write to my friend, Mrs. Cudimore; her husband is in credit now, and I have been too negligent a correspondent. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 



Soph. sighing deeply. 
O dear! O dear! O dear me! she sleeps quietly under the green sod that I would right gladly lie down beside. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit sorrowfully. 

SCENE V. 

A small room with Sophia 's books and music, and flower-pots, &c. set in order. Enter Sophia very sorrowful, leaning upon nurse . 



Soph. 
O my dear nurse! you are our best friend, and so she is going to send you away from us.--- What will become of the poor children now! What will become of us all by-and-bye! And my father too: even my father. Oh how it grieved me to see him courting that proud Lord, who seems ashamed to consider him as his brother-in-law! To see even my father look'd down upon---it goes to my heart. 


Nurse. 
Let him take what he gets, an' a murrain to him! he had no business to bring her here to torment us all, after the dear lady we have lost.--- But dry up your tears: we'll be revenged upon her: there is not a creature in the house that has not swore it: we'll be revenged upon her. 


   



Soph. 
What do you mean, nurse? 


Nurse. 
I must not tell you, my dear young lady; it is not proper that you should know any thing of it: but all the servants are joined in a plot, and they'll damp her courage, I warrant ye; they'll scare her finely. 



Soph. skipping and clapping her hands. 
O I shall be so glad to have her well scared! And I wish they would steal that nasty dog of her's, for she is ? kind to no living creature but it. 


Nurse. 
Nay, to give the devil his due, I believe she is growing fond of little Tony? 


Soph. 
Little Tony? 


Nurse. 
Yes indeed. It is strange enough, but the other day as she pass'd thro' the hall, we were all looking sourly enough upon her no doubt, when, what possess'd the child I don't know, but he held out his arms to her and smiled. 


Suph. 
Nasty little toad! to hold out his arms to her! 


Nurse. 
And, would you believe it, she took him in her arms, kiss'd him very kindly, and has taken to him wonderfully ever since. 


Soph. 
And do you think she really loves him? 


Nurse. 
Upon my honest word I do. 


Soph. 
O then, don't let them do any harm to her! don't let them take any revenge upon her! if she love Tony, I would not have her hurt. 


Nurse. 
O but she loves none of the rest; she is as hard as a millstone to the other two. O la! here comes that fine Sir Crafty, as they call him: I wonder 

   

what can bring him here: can he be coming after you, Miss Sophy? 
with a significant smile. 


Soph. 
Now don't say so, nurse, for you know I ? can't bear it. 

Enter Sir Crafty Supplecoat , advancing to Sophia with a very courteous smiling face, whilst she shrinks back and keeps close to nurse . 




Soph. aside. 
O don't go, nurse! 


Sir C. 
Lady Sarah has had the goodness, Miss Seabright, to send to you a very willing messenger, who is happy to find any pretence in the world to present himself before you. 



Nurse. aside to Soph.  
It is just as I said. 
aloud to Sir C.  
Meaning yourself, Sir? 


Sir C. 
Yes; well guess'd, nurse! you are cunning enough I see; you have the true sagacity about you that becomes your occupation; and I doubt not that your young lady has profited by your very instructive society. Now that you have found out the messenger, perhaps she may guess what his errand is. 

???????????????????????????????????????? with an affected leer. 



Nurse. aside to Sophia , who shrinks back still more. 
Ay, it is very like courting I assure you. 



Sir C. advancing as she recedes. 
Will not Miss Seabright do me the honour to bestow one thought upon it? I cannot doubt of her ability to guess my errand, if she will have the condescension. 



Nurse. aside to Soph.  
Yes, yes! it is the very thing: I have heard many a courtship begin after this fashion. 


   




Soph. to Sir C. very much embarrassed and frightened. 
I---I---I'm sure I don't know. 



Sir C. still advancing towards her as she recedes, with a more intolerable leer on his face. 
Nay, do ? have the goodness to give me this proof of the skill you have acquired in this refined academy of improvement, and tell me on what errand I am come. 



Soph. becoming angry. 
I'm sure I don't know, unless it be to make a fool of me, and I don't think I need to stay any longer for that purpose. 
runs out. 



Nurse. running after her. 
Don't run away, Miss Sophy! he is a good looking gentleman, and very civil spoken too. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 



Sir C. looking after them: 
Ha, ha, ha! 

Enter Sharp at the side by which they have gone out. 



Sharp. 
You are merry, Sir: I believe I can guess what amuses you. 


Sir C. 
I dare say thou canst, Sharp; it is easy enough to see what they have got into their foolish heads. Ha, ha, ha! does the political Lady Sarah think to put off her troublesome nursery girl upon Crafty Supplecoat. But let me encourage the mistake for a little, it will strengthen my interest with Lord Allcrest, which at present is necessary to me. Thou understand'st me, Sharp. 


Sharp. 
Yes, yes, Sir; and you will have little trouble in keeping it up, for the servants, thanks to Mrs. Pry's gossiping, who is in her lady's secrets, have got it so strongly into their heads, that if you but pick up the young lady's glove when she 

   

? drops it, they think you are putting a ring on her finger. 


Sir C. 
I thank thee Sharp; and if thou cans't at any time pick up, in thine own way, any information that may be useful to me, thou shalt not go without thy reward. And how does the young lady like her step-mother's scheme? hast thou heard them talk about that? 


Sharp. 
Nay, they say she dislikes it very much, and is deucedly shy about it. 



Sir C. smiling conceitedly. 
Poo, poo, poo! She must be allowed to have her little management as well as older people: deceit is inherent in the human mind. I came here at Lady Sarah's desire to request that she would bring her music book into the drawing room, and play to us; and she took it into her head---but what brought you here to seek me? Is the horse-dealer come to look at my ponies? 


Sharp. 
Yes, Sir. 


Sir C. 
Then I must go to him. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Sir Crafty , whilst Sharp remains behind, musing, as if in serious thought about something. 
Enter Robert in a great rage. 



Rob. 
Ay! what damn'd tricks are you thinking of? I have overheard, at the door here, all that you and your vile master have been saying. My young lady to be made fool of for his conveniency, indeed! ? She's a match for a better man than him any day in the year; there is not a lord of the land too 

   

good for her. But I'll be revenged upon him, vile serpent that he is! I'll be revenged upon him! 


Sharp. 
Well, don't be so loud, my good Robert, and you will perhaps be satisfied. He has twice promised to get me a place or to raise my wages for me, and if he break his word with me a third time,---I know what. Come man, let us go and have a glass together. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 
END OF THE SECOND ACT.


   


ACT III. 

SCENE I. 

A small country inn near Seabright 's house. Enter Beaumont, Morgan , and William Beaumont . 




Bea. to Mor. 
Well, my good Sir, how do you like travelling once more a little easy forenoon's journey in your native country? 


Mor. 
Every thing in my native country is pleasant to me, or at least ought to be so: but I don't know; I return to it again like a dog to a deserted house; he begins to wag his tail at the threshold, but there is no body to welcome him in: there is another generation grown up that knows not me; there is nothing but young people now in the world. 


Bea. 
But those young people will love and esteem you, and honour you. The caresses even of cheerful infancy go very kindly to an old man's heart. Come, come! you shall see the promising family your niece has left behind her, and your heart will warm to them. Seabright has, I fear, set an ungracious step-mother over their head; but she, perhaps, looks more so than she is.---Here comes our landlady. 

   

Enter Landlady . 

Good morning, Mrs. Thrifty. 



Land. to Bea.  
O Sir! I be glad to see you! 


Bea. 
I thank you good landlady: take good care of my wife. 


Land. 
? That I will, Sir; she's in the green chamber, giving orders to her maid. And this young gentleman is your son, I suppose. 

???????????????????????????????????????? turning, and courtesying to Wil.  


Bea. 
Yes, my good ma'am. 


Land. 
Blessings on him! Ay! if he be like his father, the blessings of the widow and the helpless will rest upon him.---You are going to the Squire's I suppose? 


Bea. 
Yes, landlady; how does the family do? 


Land. 
O lud, Sir! what an alter'd family it be! the servants a-grumbling; the lady a-scolding; the Squire himself going up and down like a man possess'd, as they tell me, and can't sleep in his bed o' nights for writing to dukes and lords and such like, and tormenting himself, poor man, just to be made a Sir or a Knight, or some nonsense or other of that kind:---and then all the poor children; it grives me to see them like so many chickens that have got no dam to gather them together, tho' I'm sure that dear good young lady does all that she can for them: I sees her every morning from the room overhead, which overlooks their garden, walking with them as if she were the mother of them all, tho' I warrant you she's soon snubb'd into the house again: O it grieves me to see them! 


   




Will. eagerly. 
? In the room overhead did you say? and in the morning? about this time? 


Land. 
I don't know if just at this very time. 


Will. 
I dare she is. 

???????????????????????????????????????? going out eagerly. 


Bea. 
But you wanted to read that paragraph about your friend, William, and here is the newspaper just come. 



Will. impatiently. 
O hang it! not now: I don't care if I never read it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit quickly. 



Bea. to Land.  
And he can't sleep in his bed, they say, for writing letters to great people? 


Land. 
Yes Sir, so they say; but there may be other reasons for a man not resting in his bed. 


Bea. 
And what other reasons may there be? 


Land, 
Sir, my grandfather was sexton of the parish, and would have thought nothing of digging you a grave in a dark winter evening, or ringing the church bell in the middle of the night, with never a living creature near him but his dog and his lantern, and I have myself sat up with dead corpses ere now, and I can't but say they always lay very quietly when I was with them; therefore I'm not a very likely person, you know, to give heed to foolish stories about ghosts and such like. Howsomever, the servants say that they hear strange ? noises since their new lady came home; and some of them swears that they have heard their late lady's footsteps walking along the hall in the middle of the night, as plainly as when she was alive. 


Bea. 
That is strange enough, landlady, 


   



Land. 
To be sure it is, Sir, but what shall we say against it; for if miser's come back to the world again to look after their gold, why may not a mother come back to it again to look after her children, oppress'd by a hard hearted step-mother? 


Bea. 
Indeed, it would be difficult in this case to gainsay it. But let us have coffee in the next room, I pray you, as soon as you can. 


Land. 
Immediately, Sir. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Landlady . 


Bea. 
This is a strange untoward account that our good landlady gives us of the family. One can find out, however, that domestic comfort is no more the lot of poor Seabright---but we shall see when we go to him what state he is in. 


Mor. 
You will see yourself then, for I shan't go to him at all. 


Bea. 
No! don't say so, my good friend: he was an affectionate husband to your niece, and an indulgent father to her children: 
 Mor. shakes his head. 
When his wife died, his old habits were ? broken up; he is of an aspiring disposition; a high alliance and a borough presented themselves to him, and he fell into the snare. 
 Mor. still shakes his head. 
He has married a woman who is narrow minded naturally; but that disposition has been strengthened by circumstances: she has long been left, as a single woman, to support high rank upon a very small income, and has lived much with those to whom begging and solicitations are no disgrace: differently circumstanced she might have been 

   

more respectable, and when differently circumstanced she may become so. 


Mor. 
Go to him thyself, Beaumont: I am an old man; my life's bark has been long buffeted about on a stormy sea, and I have seen cruel sights. I do not look upon my fellow-men with the same gentle eye as thou dost: I cannot love them myself, but I love thee because thou dost it: so e'en take me home to thine own house; no other house will I enter; and let me have an arm chair by thy fire-side to end my days in, where I may sit at my ease and grumble at the whole human race. 


Bea. 
No, no! you shall see all your relations; and love them too, and do what is right by every ? one of them. 


Mor. 
Do it for me then: I can't be troubled with it. Take my fortune into your own hands, and dispose of it as you please. 


Bea. 
No; you shall do it yourself; and the blessings of those you bestow it upon shall fall on your own head undivided and unintercepted. 


Mor. 
I will take the simplest and shortest way of settling my fortune; I will give it all to your son. 



Bea. stretching himself up with a proud smile. 
Yes, if he will have it. 

Enter William B. with great animation. 



Will. 
I've seen her father! I've seen her! 


Bea. 
Who have you seen? 


   



Will. 
My cousin Sophy: She is in the garden just now with all the children about her; and they have pulled off her hat in their play, and she looks so pretty---I---I mean good humour'd, and--- 



Bea. smiling. 
There is no harm in calling her pretty, William.---But Mr. Morgan has got something very serious to say to you: he wishes to settle his fortune upon you. 


Wil. 
His whole fortune upon me! 


Mor. 
Yes, my brave William, every shilling of it. 


Will. 
What! and Sophia and all the little Sea-brights, ? who are as nearly related to you, to have nothing? 


Mor. 
It shall be all your own. 



Will. with great vehemence. 
Hang me then if I take one sixpence more than my own share! 


Mor. 
Ah! I see how it is: I am a blasted tree from which no sapling shoots: my grey hairs are despised. 


Will. 
O say not so, my good Sir! 
bending one knee to the ground, and kissing the old man's hand. 
I will bow my head as affectionately beneath your blessing as the most dutiful child. But you shall have many children to respect and love you! and one of them---O you shall see one of them that will make your heart leap with pleasure! 

???????????????????????????????????????? hurrying away. 


Bea. 
Where are you going in such haste? 


Will. 
Never mind; I'll soon return. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 


   




Mor. to Bea. who looks significantly to him. 
Yes, my friend, he was sent to you from him who has given you many blessings. 


Bea. 
But none like this. 
fervently. 
He is a brave and upright spirit, passing with me thro' this world to a better. When he was but so high, yea but so high, how his little heart would spurn at all injustice! 

Enter Mrs. Beaumont . 



Mrs. B. 
Where is William? 


Bea. 
? He is gone over the way I believe to fetch Sophia here. 


Mrs. B. 
I'm glad of that: I came here only to see her, and I will never enter Seabright's door again, as long as I live. 


Bea. 
"As long as I live," my dear, is a phrase of very varied significations: it means the term of an angry woman's passion, or a fond woman's fancy, or a--- 


Mrs. B. 
Or a good man's simplicity, Mr. Beaumont. Do you think I will ever enter the house where that woman is the mistress; unfeeling, undelicate, uncivil? 


Bea. 
But she won't squander his fortune, however, and that is a good thing for the children. 


Mrs. B. 
Poo, Mr. Beaumont! the wickedest creature on earth has always your good word for some precious quality or other. 


Beo. 
Well, my dear, and the wickedest creature in the world always has something about it, that shews whose creature it is---that shews we were all 

   

meant for a good end; and that there is a seed---a springing place---a beginning for it in every body. 


Mrs. B. 
It is a very small speck with her, then, I'm sure, and would elude any body's search but ? your own. 


Bea. 
Now, Mr. Morgan, don't think hardly of my wife's disposition because she is angry at present: I assure you she is a very good woman, and has an excellent heart: She is in all things better than myself, tho' I'm of a more composed disposition. 



Mrs. B. softened. 
My dear Beaumont! I chide you as a child, and I honour you as a man! But no more of this.---Does William tell Sophia that she is to meet her great uncle here? 


Mor. 
I hope he will not: I should wish to be unknown for some time, that I may observe and determine for myself, since you will make me act for myself. 


Bea. 
Go then into the next room with Mrs. Beaumont: I'll wait for them here, and if he has not told her already, I'll desire him to conceal it. I hear them coming, 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Mrs. B. and Morgan . 
Enter William B. leading in Sophia . 



Soph. 
But who are you taking me to see? 


Will. 
You shall know by-and-bye.---But do stop a moment, Sophy, and pull back the hat a little from your face; you look best with it so. 
stopping and putting her hat to rights. 
That will do.--- And throw away that foolish basket out of your hands 
taking a flower basket from her, in which she 

   

seems to have been gathering rose leaves, and throwing it away. 
? and pray now hold up your head a little better. 


Soph. 
But what is all this preparation for? 

????????????????????????????????????????  Bea. who had retired to the bottom of the stage, unobserved by them, now advances softly behind Soph. and makes a sign to William to be silent. 


Wil. 
You are to see somebody that loves you very much, and likes to see you look well, you know; you are to see your aunt. 


Soph. 
But there is somebody else you told me of. 


Wil. 
Yes, there is an old connexion of ours with her; and pray now, Sophy, look pleasantly upon him; for he is an old man, and has met with misfortunes; he has been in foreign countries; he has been in prisons, and has had chains on his legs. 


Soph. 
O then, I am sure I shall look upon him kindly! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Soph. and Wil. followed at a distance by Beaumont . 

SCENE II. 

A large room in Seabright 's house. Lady Sarah is discovered sitting by a table writing, near the bottom of the stage. 



Lady S. 
There is so much light thrown across my paper here, it makes me almost blind. Who's there? is it you, Pry? 

Enter Pry from the adjoining room. 



Pry. 
Yes, my Lady; I sits in this room here pretty often, for the servants are vulgar and rude 

   

to me, and my own room is so lonesome I can't bear to be in it. Not that I hear any of them noises, excepting in the night time; yet I can't help thinking of it all day long when I am alone.---First it comes to my door, "lowe, lowe, lowe!" just like a great bull: then it comes presently after, "scrie, scrie, scrie!" just like a raven, or a cock, or a cat, or any of those wild animals; and then for the groans that it gives---O! an old jack that has not been oil'd for a twelve-month is a joke to it. 



Lady S. gravely. 
Remove this table for me to the other end of the room; it is too much in the sun here. 
 Pry removes the table near the front of the stage, and Lady S. sits down to write again, without speaking; then looking up and seeing Pry still by her. 
Leave me. 


Pry. 
I'm just going, my Lady. I believe I told you, my Lady, that Robert tells me, the vicar always expects the present of a new gown and cassock, when he is sent for to lay a ghost in any genteel house. 


Lady S. 
? Leave me, I say; I'll hear no more of that nonsense at present. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Pry , and enter Seabright . 


Sea. 
What has that absurd creature been chattering about? 


Lady S. 
Still about those strange noises. 


Sea. 
I thought so; every noise is a thief or a ghost with her. Who are you writing to? 


Lady S. 
I am writing to Lady Puler, to beg she will have the goodness to send me a few lines by 

   

return of post, to let me know how her rheumatism does: her husband, you know, may have it in his power to serve you. 



Sea. nodding. 
That is very right, my dear. 


Lady S. 
And here is a letter I have just written to Lady Mary Markly: she is a spiteful toad, and I never could endure her; but she is going to be married for the third time to a near relation of the minister's, and it will be proper in me, you know, to be very much interested in her approaching happiness. 


Sea. 
Yes, perfectly right, my dear Lady Sarah; I won't interrupt you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? sits down. 


Lady S. 
Indeed, my dear Seabright, I have been in the habit of studying these things, and I know how to make my account in it. If people would but attend to it, every acquaintance that they ? make, every letter that they write, every dinner that they give, might be made to turn to some advantage. 



Sea. hastily, with marks of disgust. 
No, no! that is carrying it too far! 


Lady S. 
Not at all, Mr. Seabright! I sent a basket of the best fruit in your garden this morning even to old Mrs. Pewterer, the Mayor of Crockdale's mother-in-law, and I dare say it won't be thrown away. 



Sea. smiling. 
Well, that, however, was very well thought of. But I interrupt you. 
she continues to write, and he sits musing for some time, then speaking to himself. 
A baronet of Great Britain and 

   

seven thousand a year! 
smiling to himself. 
Ay, that would be a resting place at which I could put up my horses and say, I have done enough. A baronet of Great Britain, and seven thousand a year! 



Lady S. looking up from her paper. 
A baronet of Great Britain you will soon be; this day's post, I trust, will inform you of that honour being conferred upon you; but the seven thousand a year, I wish we were as sure of having that added to it. 


Sea. 
I wish we were; but Mr. Plausible has been with me last night, and has pointed out a way to me, in which, by venturing a considerable capital ? on very small risk, a most prodigious gain might be made; and in which, money laid out--- 



Lady S. interrupting him eagerly. 
Will never return any more! 
getting up alarmed. 
Pray, pray, my dear Seabright, don't frighten me! The very idea of such a scheme will throw me into a fit.--- Don't let that man enter the house any more---he is a dark-eyed, needy-looking man---don't let him come here any more. 


Sea. 
Why what alarms you so much? he is a very uncommon man, and a man of genius. 


Lady S. 
Keep him out of the house then, for heaven's sake! there is never any good got by admitting men of genius; and you may keep them all out of your house, I'm sure, without being very inhospitable. 


Sea. 
Your over-caution will be a clog upon my fortune 


   



Lady S. 
A clog upon your fortune, Mr. Seabright! Am not I doing every thing that a woman can do to advance it? am not I writing letters for you? making intimacies for you? paying visits for you? teazing every body that is related to me within the fiftieth degree of consanguinity for you?---and is this being a clog upon your fortune? 


Sea. 
? Well, well! we shall see what it all comes to. 


Lady S. 
Yes, we shall see; this very post will inform you of our success; I'm sure of it; and see, here are the letters. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Pry with letters, which she gives to Sea. ; and then puts one down on the table for Lady Sarah , who is so busy looking at Seabright 's that she does not perceive it. 



Lady S. to Pry , who seems inclined to stay. 
Don't wait; I shall call when I want you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Pry. 



Sea. opening a letter and running his eye over it eagerly. 
Hang it! it is about the altering of a turnpike road. 
throws it away impatiently, and opens another letter which he reads in like manner. 
Stuff and nonsense about friendship, and old acquaintance, and so on! What a parcel of fools there are in the world! Ha! what seal is this? 
opening another letter eagerly. 
Hell and the devil! it is a letter from your brother, and only a common place letter of compliment, with never a word on the subject! 
Tearing the letters in a rage, and strewing them upon the floor. 
Cursed be pen, ink, and paper, and every one that puts his trust in them! 


   



Lady S. 
Don't destroy the blank sides of your letters, Mr. Seabright, they will do to write notes upon. 


Sea. 
O confound your little minute economy, Lady Sarah! it comes across me every now and then like the creeping of a spider: it makes me mad. 



Lady S. putting aside her papers, much offended. 
? I think I need scarcely give myself the trouble of writing any more to-day. 
seeing the letter on her table. 
Ha! a letter from my brother to me! 
opening it. 
and a later date I fancy than that which you have received. 

???????????????????????????????????????? reads it with her countenance brightening up. 



Sea. looking eagerly at her. 
What's in it? 
she is silent. 
What's in it? for God's sake tell me! 



Lady S. going up to him with a smiling face, and an affected formal courtesy. 
I have the honour to congratulate Sir Anthony Seabright. 


Sea. 
Is it really so? Is it really so? Let me see, let me see. 
snatches the letter from her and reads it. 
O it is so in very truth!---Give me your hand, my dear Lady Sarah! and give me a kiss too. 
kisses her on one cheek, and she graciously turns to him the other. 
O one will do very well.---Where are all the children? let every soul in the house come about me!---No, no, no! let me be decent; let me be moderate. 

Enter Plausible . 




Sea. going up joyfully to him. 
How do you do? how do you do, my very good friend? 


   




Lady S. pulling Sea. by the sleeve. 
You know you are engaged; you can't speak with any body at present. 


Sea. 
I can do all I have to do very well, and give a quarter of an hour to Mr. Plausible, notwithstanding. 



Lady S. still pulling him. 
You have many letters ? to write, and many other things.---You understand me? 


Plau. 
I shall have the pleasure of calling then to-morrow morning. 


Lady S. 
He is engaged to-morrow morning. 


Plau. 
And in the evening also? 


Lady S. 
Yes, Sir, and every hour in the day.--- He has not yet laid out his fortune to such advantage as will enable him to bestow quite so much leisure time upon his friends as Mr. Plausible. 


Plau. 
I can never regret the leisure time I have upon my hands, since it has given me an opportunity of obliging your Ladyship: I have procured the inestimable receipt for whitening linen without soap that I mention'd to you, and I shall bring it to you to-morrow. 


Lady S. 
Pray don't take the trouble! I am much obliged to you: but we are all so much occupied! 
to Sea.  
Are not you going to write by return of post? 



Sea. to Plau.  
I am really much engaged at present: the King has been graciously pleased, tho' most unworthy of it, and most unlook'd for on my part, to honour me with the dignity of a baronet of Great Britain. 


   



Plau. 
? I rejoice, my dear Sir, I congratulate you with all my heart; and I have the honour to congratulate your Ladyship also. 


Lady S. 
I thank you, Sir---good morning---good morning. 



Sea. to Plau.  
Trifling as these things may be, yet as a mark of royal favour--- 



Lady S. impatiently. 
Yes, yes; he knows all that well enough.---Good morning. 
to Plau.  
You will positively have no time to write your letters by the return of post. 
to Sea. pulling him away, who bows to Plau. and goes with her unwillingly. Turning round suddenly to Plau. as they are just going out. 
Whitening linen without soap? 


Plau. 
Yes, Madam; and no expence of any kind in the business. 


Lady S. 
When you are passing this way, at any rate, I should be glad to look at it. 


Plau. 
I shall have the honour very soon of calling upon your Ladyship. 


Lady S. 
You are very obliging. You will excuse us; you will excuse us, Mr. Plausible; we are really obliged to be extremely rude to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Lady S. and Sea.  



Plau. alone. 
Ha, ha, ha! I shall keep hold still I find. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Prowler , looking cautiously about as he enters. 
What do you want? 


Pro. 
Unless you want to be laid up by the heels, ? don't go out of this house by the same door that 

   

you enter'd it. I have waited in the passage here to tell you. 


Plau. 
Ha! have they found me out? 


Pro. 
Yes, by my faith, there are two as ugly looking fellows waiting for you at the front entry as ever made a poor debtor's heart quake. There is surely some back door in this house. 
Enter Robert . 


to Rob.  
My good friend, I want to know where we can find a back way out of this house. 


Rob. 
And I want to know when I am to have the crown I intrusted to you. 


Pro. 
To me, Sir? 


Rob. 
Yes, to you, Sir; and you know it very well, you do. 


Pro. 
O! you are my friend Robert, that I was enquiring after. 


Rob. 
Yes, Sir; and I will have my money directly; for I know you are a cheat; I know it by your very face. 


Pro. 
Ha, ha, ha! So you prefer having a crown to-day to receiving ten guineas to-morrow. 


Rob. 
Receiving ten fiddle-strings to-morrow! pay me my crown directly. 


Pro. 
Very well, with all my heart; but you must ? sign me a paper, in the first place, giving up all right to the ten guineas you are entitled to. 
 Robert hesitates. 
Nay, nay, I'm not such an ass as you take me for: there is pen, ink, and paper; 
pointing to the table. 
Sign me a right to the ten guineas directly. 


   




Rob. scratching his head. 
Well, we'll let it stand if you please till another time. 


Pro. 
I thought so: faith you're too cunning for me! But shew us the way to the back door, quickly. 


Rob. 
And should you like to come that way tomorrow, when you bring me the money? I shall be sure to be in the way to let you in. 


Pro. 
Let us out by the back door to-day, and let me in to-morrow by any door you please. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 
END OF THE THIRD ACT.


   


ACT IV. 

SCENE I. 

Seabright 's library. Enter Seabright , as if from a short journey, and the Eldest Boy running after him. 



Boy. 
O papa, papa! I'm glad you're come back again! And have you said over your speech to the Parliament? and did they say any fine speeches back again to you? 


Sea. 
Go away, George: I'm fatigued; I can't speak to you now. 

Enter Robert . 



Rob. 
Won't your honour have some refreshment after your journey? My Lady is gone out an airing; you had better have something. 


Sea. 
No, nothing, Robert.---A glass of water, if you please. 

???????????????????????????????????????? sits down grave and dispirited, whilst Robert fetches the water, and the Boy plays about the room. 



Rob. presenting the water. 
I'll warrant now that you have had a power of fine talking in this Parliament house; and I warrant your honour's speech was as well regarded as any of it. 


Sea. 
I thank you, Robert: I am fatigued, and would be alone for a little: take that boy away in 

   

your hand. 
Exeunt Rob. and the Boy , and Sea . remains sometime musing with a dissatisfied face; then speaking to himself. 
"The conciseness with which the Honourable Baronet who spoke last has treated this question." Ah! but I was,---I was too concise! The whole train of connecting and illustrative thoughts, which I had been at so much pains, before hand, to fix and arrange in my head, vanish'd ? from me as I rose to speak; and nothing of all that I had prepared presented itself before me, but the mere heads of the subject, standing up barren and bare, like so many detach'd rocks in a desert land. 
starting up. 
This will never do! I'm sure I have not spared myself: I have labour'd night and day at this speech: I have work'd at it like a slave in a mine; and yet, when I came to the push, it deceived me. 
shaking his head. 
This will never do! let me rest satisfied with what I have got, and think of being a speaker no more. 
stands despondingly for a little while, with his arms across, then suddenly becoming animated. 
No! I will not give it up! I saw an old school-fellow of mine in the lobby, as I went out, who whisper'd to the person standing next him as I pass'd, that I was his townsman. Does not this look as if my speech, even such as I was enabled to give it, had been approved of? O, I will not give it up! This is the only way to high distinction: I must drudge and labour still. Heigh ho! 
yawning grievously. A gentle tap is heard at the door. 
Who's there? 
angrily. 



Soph. without. 
May I come in, papa? 


   



Sea. 
Yes, yes; but what do you want? 

Enter Sophia , timidly. 



Soph. 
I only come, my dear Sir, to see how you do after your journey. But you don't look well, ? papa: you don't look happy: has any thing distress'd you? 


Sea. 
No, my good girl. 



Soph. kissing his hand. 
I thank you, papa, for calling me your good girl: I was your good girl. 


Sea. 
And are so still, my dear Sophia; but you must sometimes excuse me; I am not very happy. 


Soph. 
Ah papa! I know what makes you unhappy. 



Sea. shaking his head. 
Thou dost not! thou dost not! 


Soph. 
Ah but I do! and nobody told it me neither ---I can just see it my ownself. You are giving yourself a great deal of trouble, and courting very proud and very disagreeable people, for what you very probably won't get; and you are grieved to think that Lady Sarah does not treat us so kindly as she might do. But don't be unhappy: don't court those proud people any more: you have enough to live upon as you used to do; and Lady Sarah will be kinder to us by-and-bye. I know she will; for she loves little Tony already; and if she should not we will never complain. 



Sea. kissing her. 
My sweet child! thou deservest ---O thou deservest more than I can ever do for thee! 


   




Soph. gladly. 
? Do you say so, indeed? O then do this for me! 


Sea. 
What is it, Sophia? 


Soph. 
Trouble yourself no more with great people, and studying of speeches for that odious Parliament; and when Lady Sarah is out of the way, let the children come and play about you again, as they used to do. 



Sea. tenderly. 
I thank you, my good child, but you don't understand these things. 
Walks thoughtfully across the room, and then returns to her again. 
There is an office which Lord Allcrest has promised to procure for me, that would bring me a considerable and permanent addition to my income; if I once had that secured, I believe, in truth, it would be no unwise thing in me to follow your advice. 


Soph. 
O, my dear Sir, I hope you will have it then! 
skipping joyfully. 
I hope you will have it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter a Servant , and announces Sir Crafty Supplecoat . 


Sea. 
Sir Crafty here! can any thing have happen'd for me? 


Soph. 
O if it should be the place!---But shall I go away? for I don't like to see that man. 


Sea. 
No, my dear, stay with me; I like to have you beside me. 


Soph. 
Then I will stay; for I am happy now, and I can look upon him boldly. 

Enter Sir Crafty Supplecoat . 



Sea. 
? Sir Crafty, your servant; I'm very happy to see you. 


   



Sir C. 
Your servant, Sir Anthony; I'm happy in being able to pay you my respects.---Miss Seabright I hope is well. 
bowing to Soph. who returns his civility with chearfulness. 
Indeed, Sir Anthony, I have long'd ever since I heard your speech in the House, which, for a maiden speech---Well, I will not say what it was.---I have long'd to declare to you the extreme pleasure I take in the fair career that is now open'd before you, and in being permitted to consider myself as one of your friends. 


Sea. 
You do me great honour: I am infinitely obliged to you. My speech indeed ought---it ought to have--- 

???????????????????????????????????????? hesitating. 


Sir C. 
To have been just what it was, my dear Baronet. Your friends enjoy'd it; and, let me say it freely, without envy. 


Sea. 
I am much flatter'd: their praises are--- are--- 

???????????????????????????????????????? hesitating. 


Sir C. 
Are proportion'd to their admiration, Sir Anthony; and they have great pleasure in talking of it. 



Sea. eagerly. 
Ha! do they talk much of it? 


Sir C. 
Yes; more than I would venture to repeat ? to you. 


Sea. 
Friends, indeed, say many things that ought not to be believed. 


Sir C. 
I assure you, your's say many things which one of the qualities you so eminently possess would not, perhaps, suffer you to believe. Eloquence ---eloquence, my dear Sir---great things are to be attain'd in this country by eloquence. Eloquence 

   

and high connexions give a man such velocity in moving, that nothing can stop his career.--- But I ought to tell you, by-the-bye, that old Saunter is dead, unexpectedly; and that office, if it indeed can be consider'd as any object to you now, is ready for-your acceptance. 



Soph. aside to Sea.  
Is that the office, papa? 


Sea. 
Yes, child; hold your tongue. 
aloud. 
I am obliged to you for this intelligence, Sir Crafty: an office for life, tho' not very considerable, is of some consequence to a man who has a family of children. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Soph. takes her father's hand and presses it gratefully. 


Sir C. 
Ha, ha, ha! Sir Anthony Seabright, with all his abilities and connexions, is, like a very good father, anxious to provide for his family! I thought, my dear Sir, such talents as your's had generally been accompanied with an aspiring temper; but ? Lady Sarah's prudent character, I perceive, has had its effect upon you. 


Sea. 
No, no; you are wrong. 


Sir C. 
Nay, pardon me if I say that you also are wrong, in fixing yourself down, in the very beginning of your career, as a quiet unaspiring man, who is glad to be early provided for in a quiet, humble permanency: for this office, you know, is regarded as--- 



Sea. interrupting him eagerly. 
What, is it regarded in that light? 


Sir C. 
It really is. Mr. Trotman, now promoted to a peerage, and whose first speech, by-the-bye 

   

very much resembled your own, refused it on that very account; and Mr. Brown, and Mr. Wilson, and Sir Samuel Soppet, and many other Misters and Sirs, promoted to the same dignity, would never have got on, be assured, if they had thus fixed themselves down at the very threshold of advancement. 


Sea. 
But I see no reason why accepting such an office as this, should hinder one from advancing. 


Sir C. 
I can give you no good reason for it, I confess; but there have been certain places, time out of mind, which have, some how or other, been consider'd as indicative or otherwise of promotion, ? and which stand up in the great field of honours like finger posts in a wide track'd common, saying "this is the way to such a place:" they who are once certain of those places, move on to the others, for no earthly reason, that we can perceive, but because they have been placed in the first; and this you will readily allow is no time for innovation. 


Sea. 
I believe there is something in what you say. 


Sir. C. 
There is so much in it, that if you can find some less aspiring friend, to whom you can with confidence give up this office, relying on his honour to assist you with the full weight of his interest on all future occasions, I am sure you will never think of accepting it. 



Soph. laying hold of her father's arm, and speaking eagerly to Sir Crafty  
Ah, but he will tho'! 


   



Sea. 
Sophia, you forget yourself. 

???????????????????????????????????????? she shrinks back abash'd. 



Sir C. smiling. 
It is an amiable weakness in this interested age to forget yourself, and confined, I believe, to young ladies alone. 



Soph. provoked and roused. 
I believe, at least, political baronets, tho' not very old, do but seldom fall into it. 
archly. 
And I know, papa, who this friend is that will so kindly take this office off your hands. Sir Crafty will name him to you by-and-bye: ? it is a man who does not forget himself. 



Sea. displeased. 
What is the meaning of this, Sophia? I never saw you thus petulant before: I beg of you to retire; Sir Crafty and I must not be interrupted. 


Soph. 
I will retire, my dear Sir---but oh! 
taking her father's hand and pressing it. 
but oh!---you know what I would say to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit, casting a significant look to Seabright as she goes out. 



Sea. after a considerable pause. 
Sir Crafty, there is much in what you say, and I believe you are perfectly disinterested in the advice you give me; but I don't know that I could justify myself to my own mind in refusing this office. 


Sir C. 
There are few men less interested than myself; I will say it, Sir Anthony; I will say it proudly.---Pardon me, however, I do not presume to advise you; but hearing Lord Clacker, and the Marquis of Lackland, and some others, talking of your speech, and the usual race of such abilities, and so forth, many suggestions arose in my mind, 

   

in regard to you, my dear Sir, which I very naturally supposed just now might have presented themselves to your own. 


Sea. 
Ha! did Lord Clacker and the Marquis of Lackland talk of my speech, and my abili---I ? mean the probable effects of my situation and connexions? 


Sir C. 
I assure you they spoke of both in a way very gratifying for a friend, so much interested in your promotion as I am, to hear---but remember, I give you no advice: I am a young man, and apt, perhaps, to be too sanguine where the admiration of talents may mislead me: I am too presumptuous to mention my opinion at all. 



Sea. taking his hand with warmth. 
O no! I like you the better for it! to be warmly sanguine is characteristic and graceful in youth; and perhaps this propensity does not more often mislead it than the timorous caution of age.---You mention'd a friend to whom I might resign my pretensions to this office? 


Sir C. 
I did, Sir Anthony; but I now feel an embarrassment.---I'm sure it would never have enter'd into my imagination to think of it. But will you be kind enough to take a turn with me in the garden? there are some things that must be explain'd to you at length, lest you should at all misconceive what I am going to propose to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE II. 

The servants' hall; and Robert discovered pulling some clothes out of a bag, and laughing to himself as he looks at them. Enter cookmaid . 



Cook. 
Are you here, Robert? 


Rob. 
Yes, beef-drippings; what do you want? 


Cook. 
It is ghost-time, don't you know? and your night for it too. 


Rob. 
Indeed! 


Cook. 
Ay, indeed! I groan'd last night, and Gardener the night before; so e'en take your own turn when it comes to you: you was the first contriver of the plot. 


Rob. 
Why don't you see me preparing, hussy? I'm going to dress myself up this very night for the grand contasterfy, as a learned person would call it. 



Cook. clapping her hands. 
O griskins and gravy, but that be delightful! Are you to appear to her to-night? 


Rob. 
Yes, wench; for my master is in town, and is not expected back before to-morrow. 
Holding out the clothes. 
How do you like this black robe? Has it not a smack of the devil in it? 


Cook. 
Black! I thought you were to have been all in white, like my late lady, and to have threaten'd her for being so unkind to the children. 


Rob. 
So I intended, Deborah; but I don't know ? how, a qualm came across my heart, and would 

   

not let me make a mockery and a semblance of my dear mistress; so we'll just make the devil do, my fat Deborah; he'll serve our turn well enough. 


Cook. 
Yes; he serves many a turn, if all that is said of him be true. 


Rob. 
How do you like that black hood with the horns to it? it is all my own contrivance. 


Cook. 
O it will do hugeously! 


Rob. 
And pray mix a little sooty grease for my face, cooky; and let me have some brick-dust to make a red staring ring round my eyes. 


Cook. 
That I will in a trice! But where is your tail, master devil? Will the jack-chain be of any use to you? 


Rob. 
No, no! let her once have a good look of my horns and my red staring eyes, and I warrant you she'll never miss my tail. 


Cook. 
Good success to you! 


Rob. 
I don't doubt of success; for my lady has lived a great part of her life in an old castle in the North, and has as good a notion of a ghost or a goblin as most folks. 


Cook. 
He, he, he! Some folks will be warm enough to-night without frying cutlets. And bless ? you, man! if Mrs. Pry should come in your way, give her a claw for my sake. 


Rob. 
O never doubt that, hussy!---And here, in good time, comes Sharp to settle his part of the business; for you know we are to give his master a claw too, as well as Mrs. Pry. 


   

Enter Sharp . 



Cook. 
Come away, Sharp; which of us all is to visit your master's chamber to night in the shape of the lady that he jilted, as you told us of, because her rich uncle chose to marry whilst their wedding clothes were a-making, and who took it so much to heart, poor thing! that she died soon after of the small-pox? I should not much care to do it myself. 


Sharp. 
No, cooky, we have a better plan than that! 


Cook. 
What is it, man? 


Sharp. 
Tho' he laughs at Miss Seabright as a girl from the nursery, he has taken a strong desire to know whether she likes him or not; and, above all, what fortune she is to have: now I have promised to set Pry a talking to her lady about this, when she puts her to bed to-night, and to place him snugly in the adjoining chamber where he may hear every word that they say. 


Rob. 
? You have told him there is no danger of being discover'd, as that room is always kept lock'd, and that you have stolen the key of it? 


Sharp. 
You may be sure of that. 


Rob. 
Then you may be sure the devil won't fail to take that chamber on his way from Lady Sarah's, and pay his respects to him in passing. Come, come! let us all set about it! I'll dress in my own garret. Take some of those things in your hand. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Giving cook some of the clothes to carry, and taking the rest himself. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE III. 

Lady Sarah 's bed-room, almost dark, with a feeble light thrown across the floor, as from a bad fire. Enter Sir Crafty Supplecoat and Sharp , stealing softly on their tiptoes. 



Sir C. 
Hist, hist! which is the door, Sharp? 


Sharp. 
Never fear, Sir; come this way. 
opening the door of an adjoining room. 
Go in, Sir, and fear nothing. But you must sit in the dark, and not be impatient: Pry wont fail to pump her lady, and you'll hear every word that is said. 

???????????????????????????????????????? putting Sir Crafty into the room, and pretending to lock the door upon him, then exit laughing to himself as he goes out. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Lady Sarah , and Pry carrying lights, by the same door by which Sharp went out, allowing him time to get out of the way without meeting him. 



Pry. setting down the lights. 
Well, I wish this night were well over, for I had such strange dreams last night. 


Lady S. 
Don't trouble me with your dreams now. Have you put all my muslin things into the press, and screw'd them well down? When the creases are taken out of them, they will do perfectly well to wear another day. 


Pry. 
To be sure, my Lady; but for that old petticoat, if I do but touch it, it comes to pieces; it grieves me to see your Ladyship dragging it about 

   

like a cobweb that the flies have been thro'; it would tear up into such pretty handkerchiefs! 


Lady S. 
Will it? as large as those I commonly wear? 


Pry. 
O no! I don't mean such handkerchiefs as you would wear, my Lady, but just--- 


Lady S. 
Don't tease me now.---Have you heard ? any of those noises to-night? 

???????????????????????????????????????? seating herself in a chair near the front of the stage. 


Pry. 
La no! my Lady; did you hear any thing? 


Lady S. 
No, nothing at all: why do you look so frighten'd? 


Pry. 
I'm sure the very thoughts of it has made my teeth to chatter like a spoon in an empty dish. I never heard of such things being heard in any house, except the old Castle of Allcrest, just before the Earl, your grandfather, died. Mercy on us! there was no such noises heard in our village. 


Lady S. 
Apparitions seldom visit people of low condition, Pry. 


Pry. 
God be praised for it! I hope this here will be of the same way of thinking. I would not be a great lady and have ghosts grunting at my bed side for the whole universal world. If you please, my Lady, I should like to go up to Susan as soon as may be, pardon my boldness, for she is as frighten'd as I am; and I may chance to meet something in the stairs, if I am much later; and I know very well, my Lady, you're not afraid. 


Lady S. 
No, I'm not afraid, but I don't know how---I have a little of I don't know what, that has 

   

come upon me.---You had better sleep on the couch by my bed to-night; I may want my drops ? in the night time.---What o'clock is it? 



Pry. looking at a watch. 
Mercy on us! it's just the very time when it begins.---What's that? 

???????????????????????????????????????? alarmed. 


Lady S. 
Nothing: I heard nothing. 
a long pause; then a deep groan is heard from the bottom of the stage. 
Come, come! stand closer to me Pry. 
taking hold of Pry.  
It had a strange, hollow, unnatural sound. 


Pry. 
Yes; just like a body speaking out of a coffin. 

???????????????????????????????????????? A pause, and then a second groan is heard, louder than the first. 


Lady S. 
Stand closer still, I beseech you: that was horrible! 
putting out her hand, trembling. 
Whe---whe---where is the bell-rope? 


Pry. 
O la! you know well enough it hangs in the other end of the room. 


Lady S. 
Go pull it then: pull it violently. 
 Pry hesitates, and seems very unwilling to go. 
Go, I say! 

????????????????????????????????????????  Pry goes; and as she is half way across the room, another groan, followed by a terrible howl, is heard, and she runs back again to Lady Sarah . 


Lady S. 
O go and do it! for heaven's sake! for God's sake! for mercy's sake do it! 

????????????????????????????????????????  Pry then goes sidling across the floor, looking on every side with terror and suspicion, till she gets to the bell rope which hangs by the head of the 

   

bed and near the door of the room; when, putting out her hand to pull it, Robert , dressed like the devil, rises from behind a great chair close to the bed. Pry screams and runs out of the door, whilst he gives her a claw in the passing, and then advances towards the front of the stage to Lady Sarah . 



Lady S. shrinking back as he advances. 
O come no nearer, whatever thou be, thou black and horrible sight! 
Devil still advances. 
O come no nearer! in the holy name of--- 


Devil. 
Baw! 

???????????????????????????????????????? giving a great howl, and still advancing. 


Lady S. 
In the blessed name of--- 


Devil. 
Baw! 

???????????????????????????????????????? with another howl, and coming very near her. 



Lady S. falling upon her knees, and clasping her hands together. 
? O, as thou art awful, be merciful! O touch me not, for I am a miserable sinner! 


Devil. 
Yea thou art---yea thou art---yea thou art, and thou shalt smart. Ill deeds thou dost, and thou shalt roast. 

???????????????????????????????????????? holding his great claw over her. 



Lady. S. contracting all her body together, and sinking down upon the floor. 
O, as thou art horrible, be merciful! What shall I do? what shall I do? 


Devil. 
Be kind to thy husband's children, or I will tear--- 


Lady S. 
O yes, yes! 


Devil. 
Give them good victuals, and good education, and good clothing, or I will tear thee--- 


Lady S. 
O yes, yes! 


   



Devil. 
And give no more good things to Tony than the rest, or I will--- 
starting back upon hearing a loud knocking at the street-door. 
What's that? 



Lady S. raising her head, and seeing him farther off. 
No more good things to Tony than the rest! It was no devil that spoke those words, I'm sure. 

???????????????????????????????????????? taking courage, and getting up. 



Devil. aside, after moving farther off and listening. 
Faith I'll turn and give her a claw yet! I shall never have another opportunity. 

???????????????????????????????????????? approaching her again. 


Lady S. 
Get along! I know you well enough: you are no devil, but a rascally knave. 

???????????????????????????????????????? setting herself in a posture of defence, when a noise is heard without, and he, taking alarm, makes a hasty exit into the adjoining chamber. 
Enter Seabright , and Pry coming fearfully after him. 



Sea. 
Where is this devil that Pry has been telling me of? 



Lady S. pointing to the adjoining room. 
Follow him ? my dear Sir Anthony! Follow after the rascal. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Seabright into the adjoining room. 



Lady S. calling to him. 
Be sure you don't let him escape.---Have you caught him yet? 



Sea. within 
Yes, I've caught him. 


Lady S. 
Give him a good beating then; don't spare him! he's a good brawny devil! O don't spare him! 

A great scuffle is heard within, and Sea. calls to Lady S . 
I'm dealing with him roughly enough, if that will satisfy you. 
he then calls out as if speaking to the 

   

Devil . 
And take that, and that, and that too, you diabolical rascal! You must have midnight frolicks in my house, must you? 

Enter Sophia alarmed. 



Sophia. 
What is all this? did I not hear my father's voice? 



Lady S. looking suspiciously at her. 
Yes, you know nothing of the matter, innocent lamb! 


Pry. 
I hope my master will give him a sound beating, for I know well enough it is that knave Robert; I could smell the very stink of his tobacco as he claw'd me in the passing. 


Lady S. 
Drag him to the light, Sir Anthony, let us see him stript of his devil's skin. Ha! here he comes. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Seabright dragging in Sir Crafty Supplecoat , who is pulled along very unwillingly, and hiding his face with his arm. 


Pry. 
Why that an't like him neither. Come, ? come! take down your arm, and let us see who you are. 

???????????????????????????????????????? pulling down his arm, and discovering his face. 



All. exclaiming. 
Sir Crafty Supplecoat! 



Soph. clapping her hands. 
O I'm glad of that! I'm so glad that it is only Sir Crafty! I should have been grieved indeed if it had been poor Robert. And so it is you Sir Crafty! ha, ha, ha, ha! 

???????????????????????????????????????? All join her in laughing heartily, whilst Robert , having pulled off his devil's dress, enters accompanied by Sharp and some of the other servants, and joins also in the laugh. 


   




Lady S. going up to Sir Crafty with great indignation. 
And so, Sir Crafty Supplecoat, it is to your midnight mummery I am indebted for the stern and solemn threatenings I have received! I have been visited I find by a devil of consequence. Your earnest zeal for my reformation is, indeed, very flattering. 


Sea. 
Sir Crafty, mean and despicable as you must appear to me, I have too much respect for your situation in life to expose you any longer to this open humiliation and disgrace: Come with me to my dressing room. 


Sir C. 
I protest to you Sir Anthony, and to Lady Sarah, and to all the world if they were here present, that I am in no wise concern'd in what you suspect me of. 


Lady S. 
O certainly you protest, Sir Crafty! but do you think that will pass upon me? Have I not known you since you were a boy but so high, ? with all your little, artful, wriggling, under-hand ways of getting your play fellows' toys from them, which I always despised and contemned? To be sure, you will protest any thing, and in the politest manner too: you will send a message to Sir Anthony to-morrow morning, I make no doubt, to enquire how he does; and to hope that his fists are not too much fatigued with their last night's exertions. 

???????????????????????????????????????? all the servants laugh again. 


Sea. 
Come, come, this is too bad! Retire with me, Sir Crafty; you can say nothing for yourself at 

   

this moment. I am sorry I have rib-roasted you so unmercifully; can you walk? 



Sir C. very shortly. 
Yes, yes. 


Rob. 
O we'll help his honour. 

???????????????????????????????????????? going up with Sharp , very provokingly, to assist him. 


Sir C. 
Keep off, scoundrels! you are at the bottom of all this. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Seabright leading out Sir Crafty in a very rueful plight, followed by Lady Sarah and Sophia , and the servants, endeavouring to stifle their laughter. 

SCENE IV. 

Seabright's library. A great noise and confusion of voices is heard without. 




Seabright. speaking without. 
Torment me no more with these things! I will hear no more complaints, and no more explanations! let me have peace, I beseech you, in mine own house, for one half hour at least. 
He enters much disturb'd, shutting the door violently behind him, and pacing up and down the room, sometimes muttering to himself, and sometimes speaking aloud. 
What! is there no getting on in this upward path of honour, unless we tear our way through all these briars and nettles?---Contention and misery at home! is this the price we pay for honour and distinction in the world? Would no honours take root on my untoward soil, till I had grubb'd up every sprig and shoot of comfort to make room for them? It were better to be a panniered jack-ass, and pick up my scanty provender 

   

from the ditch, than be a garter'd peer in such a home as this.---I had once a home! 
beating his heel rapidly upon the floor. 
---Well, well, well! I have push'd my bark from the shore, and I must take wind and tide as they set. 
Enter Servant . 

Who comes to disturb me now? 


Ser. 
A packet, please your honour, from Mr. Plausible. 



Sea. eagerly. 
Ha! give it me. 
Exit Ser.  
Yes, it is the plan. 
tearing off the cover. 
I hold in my ? hand perhaps, that which shall put every domestic arrangement on such an ample footing, as must extinguish these petty broils. 
a pause, and then his countenance lightening up eagerly. 
Ah, do I indeed grasp in this handful of paper the embryo of my future fortune? In faith I could almost believe that I do! Let me go to my closet and examine it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

SCENE V. 

A room in the inn. Enter Seabright and Landlady speaking as they enter. 



Sea. 
So, Mr. Plausible is not yet come? 


Land. 
No, your honour, not as I know of. There is a dark-looking, lank gentleman in the cow-yard, just now, asking our Bridget how many pounds of butter may be made out of one cow's milk in a year, and such like, and setting all that she says down in his pocket book. He, he, he! poor thing, she scarcely knows a cow from a sheep, 

   

by reason that she is but a poor pea-picking girl from St. Giles's, that has scarcely been a month in the country; howsomever, he gets wonderfully on with his information. 


Sea. 
Ay, that is him: he has a talent for picking up information upon every subject, and from every body: pray let him know I am here. 
Exit Land . 
--- 
After musing a little while. 
Ten thousand a-year! and the risk of failing but a mere trifle, not to be taken into the calculation. And his reasons are good, obvious, and convincing. But let me be moderate now: let me suppose that it only brings me in six thousand a-year; even that will entitle me to a peerage. 

Enter Plausible . 



Plau. 
I have a request to make to you, Sir Anthony? 


Sea. 
What is that, my dear Plausible? 


Plau. 
? When you purchase the large estate in Shropshire, will you let me have an easy lease of a good pasture farm or two upon it? It will be a country retirement for me; and I find on calculation that a hundred milk-cows, well fed and well managed, will bring in no contemptible revenue. 



Sea. smiling. 
You talk of this estate with great confidence, Plausible. 


Plau. 
Nay, I am only certain of putting the money to buy it into your pocket; you will purchase it or not, as you please. 


Sea. 
I begin, indeed, to think favourably of your scheme, and I appointed you to meet me here, 

   

that we might not he interrupted by Lady Sarah. Women you know are timorous, and have no idea of encreasing a fortune except by saving. We shall look over your calculations together. If salt is raised but one penny in the pound, how many thousands do I put in my pocket? 


Plau. 
This paper will inform you exactly. And you see I have put but one penny upon the pound; for salt being a necessary of life, greatly to increase its price would be hard and unfeeling; it would make you unpopular in the country, and in the end create a resistance detrimental to its own ends. ? I am for moderate and sure gains. 



Sea. taking the paper. 
I esteem you for it; my ideas coincide with yours most perfectly in this particular: and the paper also in which you have drawn out your plan for buying up the rock-salt, I should be glad to look over that. 


Plau. 
Here it is in my pocket. 

Enter Beaumont and William Beaumont . 




Sea. angrily. 
Who comes now? O it is you, Beaumont. We are busy; I shall come to you by-and-bye, but at present I cannot be interrupted. 


Bea. 
I must speak with you, my friend. 


Sea. 
Not at present---you see I am engaged. 



Bea. beckoning him. 
But one word in your ear, I beseech you. 


Sea. 
Yes, by-and-bye; at present I am busy with affairs of importance. 


   



Bea. 
By-and-bye will, perhaps, be too late; I must speak with you immediately. 

???????????????????????????????????????? beckoning him again. 



Sea. impatiently. 
I cannot speak with you just now, Beaumont, and I will not. 


Bea. 
No, no! you will. If there be any love of God or any love of man in your heart, you will speak with me. 



Sea. softened. 
Well then. 
goes to Beaumont , who whispers in his ear and endeavours to draw him away. 
No, I won't go with you, Beaumont, to be ? retarded and cross'd with your fears and suspicions: Speak out boldly, and Mr. Plausible will answer for himself. 
smiling to Plau.  
I believe we must explain our plan to this good friend of mine, for he thinks you are going to ruin me, and he is miserably afraid of projectors; ha, ha, ha! 



Plau. smiling placidly. 
I esteem him for the interest he takes in his friend, and I don't condemn his suspicions: there are so many absurd schemes in the world, that it is prudent to be distrustful; but I will shew him the firm ground on which we rest, and he will be satisfied. Do me the honour, my dear Sir, to sit down by me, and I'll explain it to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? to Beau.  


Bea. 
Pray don't take that trouble, Mr. Plausible: I have no information for enabling me to judge of it: my mind has been little exercised in regard to the money affairs of the world. But 

   

though I am not a man of the world, I have one or two things to say to my friend that I wish him to attend to. 



Sea. smiling rather contemptuously. 
Well, what are they Beaumont? you are, indeed, not a man of the world. 


Bea. 
Every man who risks his fortune in any ? scheme, believes he has good grounds to rest upon: they are such as appear feasible to him. 


Sea. 
Feasible! ours is certain. 



Bea. shaking his head. 
A man who is anxious to get rich is apt to let his judgment be imposed upon, and forgets how many have fail'd in the same track before him. 


Sea. 
I wish those who are apt to give advice, would take the same thing into their consideration. 


Bea. 
Nay, my friend, there is a social influence which we all have, even the meanest of us, over one another, and there is more advice taken in the world than you are aware of. But had every adviser from the beginning of time fail'd before me, I will never believe that he who pleads to a father in behalf of his own children will speak without effect. Hear me then; let him who stands alone, run every risk to aggrandize himself, but let a father---O let the father of a family consider! 


Plau. 
You forget, my good Sir, that the father of a family has a higher motive than any other man to aggrandize himself. 


   




Sea. vehemently. 
Rather than not place my children in the situation I desire for them, I would have no children at all. 



Bea. with warmth. 
? What, will you say of creatures passing onward to the noblest destination, you had rather they had never been, unless they can gather up so much dust and trash on their way? You think yourself an ambitious parent---O I would be for them a thousand times more ambitious than thou art. 


Sea. 
Yes, you will shape your son's fortune out of the clouds, I make no doubt. 

???????????????????????????????????????? smiling contemptuously. 



Will. B. who has modestly kept behind, now coming forward with spirit. 
Wherever my fortune may be shaped for me, to be the honest, well principled son of an honest, and good father, is a distinction I would not give up for all that you, and men like you, are scrambling for. 
turning to Beau.  
Come away, father; they but mock at what you say. 


Bea. 
Let him mock if he will, but let him hear me. 


Plau. 
He will hear your advice with great pleasure from the pulpit, Mr. Beaumont. 


Will. B. 
It would have been happy for the unfortunate men who have listened to yours, Mr. Plausible, if they had received it from the same place. 
pulling Beaumont away. 
Come away, father, you but waste words upon them. 


   



Bea. 
? Nay, I would yet try if there is not some heart in him to be moved. 


Sea. 
My dear Beaumont, you are a very good man, but you know nothing of the matter. 



Will. B. pulling away his father. 
Leave them, leave them, Sir! Good man, as he contemptuously calls you, you are also wise enough for me: and I would not exchange fathers with the proudest young lord in the kingdom. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Beau. and Will. B. Will. putting his father's arm proudly under his, and walking off with spirit. 


Plau. 
We are obliged to that young dog, however, for taking him away. 


Sea. 
Yes; but we will go to another room, for he may return again. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.


   


ACT V. 

SCENE I. 

Seabright 's library. He is discovered sitting by a table fast asleep, on which are scattered letters and papers. Enter Pry softly behind on her tiptoes, and making a long neck to see what he is about. 




Pry. shaking her head piteously. 
Poor man! poor man! he can't sleep in his bed o'nights, and yet he has never committed any wicked crimes, that I ever heard of. 



Sea. angrily, after speaking inarticulately to himself in his sleep. 
You don't know my name! 
muttering again inarticulately. 
The name of Lord Sea-bright. 
muttering again, whilst Pry slips still nearer to him, listening with a face of great curiosity. 
I can't walk in my robes any longer.---See how the crowd stares at me; ha, ha, ha! 
laughing uncouthly, and Pry , drawing still nearer him, comes against a chair on her way, the noise of which wakes him, and she retires precipitately. 
What's that? 
rubbing his eyes and looking round. 
It has been some noise in my dream. Ah! would it had been a reality!---What a busy, prosperous, animating world I have been in for these last two hours. 
looking at his watch. 
Ha! I have 

   

slept only a quarter of an hour; and I have enjoyed as many honours in that short term as would enrich my life-time.---Shall they indeed enrich it?---Wise men, in former ages, consider'd the visions of our sleep as faintly sketching out what is to happen, like trees and castles seen thro' the morning mist, before the brightening sun gives to them the distinct clearness of reality. 
smiling animatedly. 
In faith I could almost believe it! There is that invigorating ? confidence within me which says I shall not stop short at these paltry attainments---A baronet! every body now is a baronet.---My soul disdains the thought! 

???????????????????????????????????????? gives his chair a kick, and overturning it with a great noise, 
Enter Pry alarmed. 



Pry. 
O la, Sir! what is the matter? 


Sea. 
What, are you up Pry? Why are you out of bed so late? 


Pry. 
Making your coffee, Sir. 


Sea. 
Did not I tell you to leave it on the lamp, and go to bed? 


Pry. 
Yes; but I thought it would keep warmer, some how, if I sat by it myself. 



Sea. aside. 
Great fool! 
aloud. 
Let me have some of it then; my head will be clearer afterwards for writing. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 



Pry. shaking her head, and looking after him as he goes out. 
Poor man! he would have every body to go to bed but himself. What has he got here now? 
looking at the papers on the table. 
Copies of letters to my Lord B---, and notes for a speech on the 

   

salt duties; and calculations.---O lud, lud! What a power of trouble he does give himself! Poor man! poor man! 
Exit in a hurry, calling out as she goes. 
I just stay'd behind, Sir, to stir the fire for you. 

SCENE II. 

A room in the inn. Enter Mrs. Beaumont and Landlady , by different sides. 



Land. 
La, madam! here be the great Lord, Lady Sarah Seabright's brother, who wants to see you. 


Mrs. B. 
Wants to see me? how comes this great condescension? 


Land. 
I reckon, madam, that some misfortune has befallen him, and that makes some folks wonderfully well bred. I was just standing at the door, a few minutes ago, and thinking, to be sure, nothing at all of the matter, when who should I see drive past but my Lord, just turning the corner as he used to do to Sir Anthony's gate. Well, I thinks no more of the matter, when in a trice by comes that saucy-looking gentleman of his, that turns up his nose at my ale, and puts a letter into his lord's hand; upon which, after he had read it, he desired his postillions to turn round and set him down here. I'm as sure as I am a living woman that something has happen'd, for he came into the house with a face as white as my apron. 


Mrs. B. 
And wants to see me? 


Land. 
Yes, madam; he ask'd first of all for Mr. Beaumont, and finding he was walk'd out, he ask'd next for you. 


   



Mrs. B. 
? But how did he know we were here? 


Land. 
La, madam! he saw your carriage in the yard, and moreover your man told him that his master and mistress had stopp'd here, on their way to Yorkshire, to see Sir Anthony's children. But here he comes, madam. Save us all! how proud and how vexed he looks! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 
Enter Lord Allcrest . 



Lord A. 
Madam, I am sorry to find Mr. Beaumont is gone out: I had something of importance to communicate to him, but I believe it will be nearly the same thing if I impart it to you. I---I--- 
seems embarrassed. 
---it is an unfortunate affair. As to myself, I have little to do with it; but it is right that the near relations of Sir Anthony Seabright should know, that his salt scheme has entirely fail'd, and he is involved in utter ruin; they can communicate the dreadful tidings to him more properly than I can. 


Mrs. B. 
We are obliged to you, my Lord; it is a piece of intelligence we have every day expected to hear, but which does not certainly concern us more nearly than yourself, as I, who am Sir Anthony's connexion, stand exactly in the same degree of relation to him with your Lordship. 


Lord A. 
Yes; my sister, indeed, would gratify ? very foolishly a foolish inclination---but it is a recent thing, scarcely to be consider'd as a---a--- a---he had many children by your sister, and lived with her many years. 


   




Mrs. B. smiling with great contempt. 
I don't know, indeed, at what time, from the date of a man's marriage, he is entitled to claim affinity with his wife's relations: perhaps it varies with occurrences, and misfortunes certainly have no tendency to shorten it. 


Lord A. 
Madam, let me have the honour to inform you, that there is no term in which the chief of a noble and ancient family can be contaminated by the inferior alliances of those individuals who belong to his family: such things are consider'd as mere adventitious circumstances. 


Mrs. B. 
You teach me, my Lord, to make very nice distinctions; and therefore, whilst I pay all respect to you as the representative of a noble family, you must likewise permit me to express for you, as an individual, sentiments of a very opposite nature. 


Lord A. 
Good breeding, madam, will not permit me to return such an answer as you deserve; and therefore I will no longer intrude on your time. 


Mrs. B. 
? A better excuse, perhaps, might be found; but any one will be perfectly acceptable that procures me the pleasure of wishing your Lordship good morning. 

???????????????????????????????????????? As Lord Allcrest is about to go out, enter Beaumont and Morgan , and prevent him. 


Bea. 
I am sorry, my Lord, I was not in the way when you did me the honour to enquire for me. 



Lord A. passing him abruptly with a slight bow. 
Good morning, Sir; good morning. 


   




Bea. going after him. 
You are not going to leave me thus, my Lord, angry and disturb'd as you appear to be? I cannot suffer any body, man, woman, or child, to leave me offended, if it be possible for me to part with them on more amicable terms. I flatter myself it is possible to do so on the present occasion; I am sure, I am confident of it, if you will do me the honour to explain in what way I can be useful to you. 


Lord A. 
I came here, Sir, upon no concerns of my own; and the conversation I have had the honour to hold with this Lady, makes any explanation of the business that brought me unnecessary. 


Bea. 
But she is angry too, I perceive, and I will have no explanation from her. I know already the unfortunate affairs of poor Seabright; and I can explain to myself the intention of your Lordship's visit: you must have the goodness to stay and hear ? if I explain it right. 
taking him by the coat and preventing him from going. 
Nay, nay, my Lord! the spirit of charity and of peace-making makes a well-meaning man very bold,---you shall stay. 



Lord A. relenting, and turning back. 
I do believe, Mr. Beaumont, that you are a very good man, and as such I respect you; but since you already know the misfortune of Sir Anthony Seabright, and will, from the dictates of your own good heart, open the matter to him in the best manner possible, my business with you is anticipated. 


   



Mrs. B. 
Not, I believe, entirely, my Lord; for he knows nothing at all, as yet, of those nice distinctions between individual and family relationship, which may be necessary to prevent him from forming any unreasonable expectations from a noble brother-in-law. I presume your Lordship means to hurry back to town again, without seeing Sir Anthony. 


Bea. 
Hold your tongue, Susan; your spirit is less mild than it ought to be, considering the warm good heart it belongs to. It is not so: his lordship did not intend returning to town without seeing his distress'd friend; you are wrong in the very outset of your account. Is she not, my Lord? 



Lord A. confused and hesitating. 
? If my seeing him could be of any real service, I should never--- I could not certainly have thought of returning without seeing him.---But he has never attended to my opinions: my advice has been disregarded--- and then, his damn'd vanity: he refused an office the other day, which I would have procured for him, that would have been a competency for life--- it makes me mad to think of it. 


Bea. 
Ah, my Lord! he is in that state in which a man's errours should be remember'd only by himself: he is in adversity. 


Lord A. 
He has thought only of himself, I'm sure. 


Bea. 
His connexion with your sister has, indeed, been unlucky; and I can, in some degree, sympathize with your resentment. 


   



Lord A. 
You mistake me, Sir; his connexion with my sister is of no consequence to me; and I shall take care that it shall be of as little to her as possible, for I will make her independent of him: but children!---risking every thing on one single stake, with a family of children!---I am provoked beyond all measure when I think of this. 



Mrs. B. bridling up. 
His children, my Lord--- 


Bea. 
? Now pray, my dear, hold your tongue, if it be possible! We are weak, passionate creatures, why should we rub and fret one another thus? 
to Lord A.  
I praise you much, my Lord, for the interest you take in the children; but here is a good man 
pointing to Morgan . 
who will--- 


Mor. 
Stop, stop, my good friend, and don't now lead me into any discussion upon this subject. I am disturb'd, and uncomfortable, and unequal to it. Take his Lordship by himself; and say to him what you please for me. 
to Mrs. B.  
Come with me, niece. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Mor. and Mrs. B. 


Bea. 
Let me have the pleasure of attending your Lordship into the fields, where we can take a short turn or two, and speak of this subject at length: I see strangers arrived; and it is noisy here. 


Lord A. 
Most willingly. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE III. 

Seabright 's house. Enter Seabright , followed by Sophia , the eldest boy , and the little girl . 



Soph. 
Indeed, papa, you are in such good humour this morning we can't help following you. I hope we are not troublesome; if we are, I'll take the children away. 


Sea. 
No, my good children, you are not troublesome; you shan't go away. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The children hang on his coat, and look up in his face much pleased. 


Soph. 
They are so glad to hang upon you again, papa; and you are so good humour'd this morning! 


Sea. 
I finish'd my papers last night; and I have had some pleasant dreams too.---This is a chearful, enlivening morning: every thing is in bright sunshine around us: it is like a day that wears good fortune on its face:---and, perhaps, it does. 


Soph. 
I hope it does: and now that you seem so happy, papa, I would fain plead to you in behalf of a poor good man, who is not very happy at present. 


Sea. 
And who is that? 


Soph. 
Ah, you know very well; it is poor Robert. I know it was very wrong in him to frighten Lady Sarah; but he meant it for our good, and he will break his heart if he is not allow'd to be with us again. 


   



Sea. 
Say no more of this at present, Sophia; and, ? perhaps, by-and-bye, he may return to us again as your own servant. 


Soph. 
Ha! 
surprised. 


Sea. 
Yes, my sweet girl; I will be very liberal to you and to all my children: I will make a good amends to you for all that is past. 
turning to the boy. 
And you, my good boy, I must think of you by-and-bye. Thou art become a stout boy, George: let me look at thy face. 
lifting up his hair from his forehead. 
Ay, it is a comely face enough: it will make a very good countenance for an admiral, or a general, or even for the woolsack, if thine inclinations should lead thee that way. Let me feel thy weight too, young rogue. 
taking him up in his arms. 
Ah! would now that I could but know the rank and eminence of the future man I hold in these arms! 


Soph. 
My dear Sir, you are so good to us, and so good humoured this morning, I could wager those letters by the post have brought you pleasant news. 


Sea. 
Letters by the post! I have received none. 


Soph. 
Then you have not read them yet. You slept so much longer than usual this morning, that you were not up when they came, and they were ? put on the table in the next room. 

???????????????????????????????????????? pointing off the stage. 


Sea. 
Let me see them, then; if they bring me any good news they are welcome. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit with a light active step. 


   



Soph. 
Now, children, did not I tell you yesterday that papa would love us again; and you see he has begun to do it already. 


Boy. 
And so he does, Sophy; and I'm sorry I spoke so naughtily of him, for my heart jumps so when he loves me! 
looking off the stage. 
But see! what is he about now, beating his forehead and walking up and down so strangely? 


Soph. 
O dear! something is the matter. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit, alarmed. 



Boy. to little girl. 
Now don't ask me for those marbles at present, Emma; I can't find them, I don't know where they are. 
looking off the stage again. 
O how terrible he looks! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Re-enter Seabright , with an open letter in his hand, beating his head with his clench'd hands, and tossing about his arm distractedly, followed by Sophia , who seems frightened at him, and yet wishing to sooth him. A long pause, in which he paces up and down the stage followed by Sophia , whilst the children run into a corner, frightened, and stare at him. 



Soph. after attempting in vain several times to speak. 
My father! my dear, dear father! 
he still paces up and down without heeding her. 
O if you would but speak two words, and tell what is the matter with you, my dear, dear Sir! 


Sea. 
I am ruined, and deceived, and undone! I am a bankrupt and a beggar!---I have made beggars of you all! 


   



Soph. 
O no, father! that won't be! for God's sake don't take on so violently! 



Sea. still pacing up and down, followed by Soph.  
? I am a bankrupt and a beggar!---disgrace, and ridicule, and contempt!---Ideot, ideot, ideot! O worse than ideot! 


Soph. 
Dear father! 

???????????????????????????????????????? The children run and take hold of Sophia , as she follows him. 


Sea. 
Come not near me---come not near me, children---I have made beggars of you all! 


Soph. 
But we will come near you, my dear father, and love you and bless you too, whatever you have done. Ay, and if we are beggars, we will beg with you, and beg for you cheerfully. 


Sea. 
Oh, oh, oh! This is more than I can bear! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Throws himself into a chair, quite overcome, whilst the children stand gazing on him, and Sophia hangs over him affectionately. 
Enter Lady Sarah . 



Lady S. 
What are you doing here, children?--- What is all this for?---What is the matter with you, Sir Anthony?---No answer at all!---What letter is this? 
picks up the letter which Seabright had dropt in his agitation, and reads it; then breaking out violently. 
O, I told you it would come to this!--- I counsel'd you---I warn'd you---I beseech'd you. O Sir Anthony! Sir Anthony! what devil tempted you to such madness as this? 


Soph. 
Oh, madam, do not upbraid him! See how he is! 


   



Lady S. 
I see how it is well enough: the devil, the devil of ambition has tempted him--- 
going nearer him with great vehemence. 
Did not I tell you that with prudence, and management, and ? economy, we should in the end amass a good fortune? but you must be in such a hurry to get rich! ---O it would get the better of a saint's spirit to think how I have saved, and regulated, and laid down rules for my houshold, and that it should all come to this!---To have watched, and toiled, and fretted as I have done, and all to no purpose!---If I did not begrudge the very food that was consumed in the family!---If I did not try all manner of receipts that the wife of the meanest citizen would scarcely have thought of!---If I did not go a bargain hunting thro' every shop in London, and purchase damaged muslins even for my own wearing! ---It is very hard---it is very hard indeed! 
bursting into tears. 
O it is enough to turn a woman's brains! 



Sea. starting up in a rage. 
By heavens, madam, it is enough to turn a man's brains to think, that, in addition to the ruin I have brought upon myself and my children, I have taken to my bosom---I have set over their innocent heads, a hard-hearted, narrow, avaricious woman, whose meanness makes me contemptible, whose person and character I despise!---This, madam, the spirit of ambition, which you talk of, has tempted me to do, and ? for this, more than all his other malice, I will curse him! 


   




Soph. endeavouring to sooth him. 
Pray be not so violent with her! she does not consider what she says---she did not intend to hurt you. 


Lady S. 
Sir Anthony Seabright, you are a base man and a deceiver: my brother shall know how you have used me: he has made you a Member of Parliament and a Baronet. 


Sea. 
Yes, and a contemptible fool, and a miserable wretch into the bargain. But no, no, no! I have made myself so; I deserve my punishment.--- 
???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Lord Allcrest, Beaumont, Morgan, Mrs. B. and William B.  
And here are more of my advisers and beseechers come to visit me: advance, advance, good friends! you are come to look upon a ruined man, and you are gratified. 



Bea. going up to him affectionately. 
No, my dear Seabright; in a very different spirit are we come: we come to sympathize with you, and to console you. 


Sea. 
I hate sympathy, and I hate consolation! You are come, I suppose, to sympathize with me too, my Lord, and to put me in mind of the damn'd place I have given up to that knave Sir Crafty Supplecoat. 


Lord A. 
? No, Sir Anthony, I scorn to upbraid, but I pretend neither to sympathize with you nor to console you: I come to rescue my sister from a situation unworthy a daughter of the house of Allcrest, and she shall go home with me. 


   



Sea. 
Nay, by the sincerity of a miserable man, but you do console me.---Take her o' God's name! I received her not half so willingly as I resign her to you again. 

???????????????????????????????????????? taking Lady Sarah 's hand to give her to her brother, which she pulls away from him angrily, and going up to Lord Allcrest , gives him her hand as an act of her own. 


Lady S. 
If my brother will indeed have the goodness! 



Boy. skipping joyfully. 
Sophy! sister Sophy! she is going away from us! is not that nice? 


Soph. 
Hush, George! 



Sea. to Mrs. B. on perceiving her smile to herself. 
Yes, madam, I make no doubt, but all this is very amusing to you---you are also come, no doubt, to bestow upon me your contribution of friendly sympathy. 


Mrs. B. 
Indeed, Sir Anthony, recollecting the happiness you have enjoyed, and the woman that shared it with you, you are entitled to no small portion of pity. 



Bea. to Mrs. B.  
Fie upon it! fie upon it, Susan! can't you hold out your hand to him, and forgive him nobly, without tacking those little ungracious ? recollections to it? 
to Sea.  
Indeed, my dear Seabright, you look upon us all with the suspicious eye of an unfortunate man, but we are truly come to you in kindness and Christian simplicity; and we bring you comfort. 


Sea. 
Yes, Beaumont, you come to me in simplicity. What comfort can you bring to me, ruined 

   

as I am? all my fair prospects blasted! all my honours disgraced! sunk even to obscurity and contempt! ---you are indeed come in great simplicity. 


Bea. 
What comfort can we bring to you? does grandeur and riches include the whole of human happiness, that you should now feel yourself inconsolable and hopeless? Cannot a quiet, modest retreat, independent of the bustle of the world, still be a situation of comfort? 


Sea. 
I know what you mean: contemptible, slothful obscurity. 


Bea. 
You mistake me, Sir Anthony; respectable and useful privacy. 


Sea. 
I understand you well enough: hopeless and without object---I abhor it! 


Bea. 
What, Seabright! can a man with a family to grow up around him, be hopeless and without object? Come here children, and speak for ? yourselves. 

???????????????????????????????????????? he takes the children in his hands, and encouraging Sophia to come forward, they surround Seabright . 



Soph. after endeavouring in vain to speak, and kissing her father's hand tenderly. 
O my dear father! in the loneliest cottage in England I could be happy with you. I would keep it so neat and comfortable, and do every thing for you so willingly; and the children would be so good, if you would but love us enough to be happy with us! 



Sea. catching her in his arms. 
Come to my heart, my admirable girl! thou truly hast found the way to it, and a stubborn unnatural heart it has been.--- 

   

But I will love you all---yes my children, I will love you enough to be happy with you. 
pausing. 
I hope I shall---I think I shall. 



Will. B. eagerly. 
Yes, you will! yes, you will! if there be one spark of a true man in your breast, you will love them to the last beat of your heart. 



Bea. smiling affectionately on his son. 
Get away, stripling! your warmth interrupts us. 


Sea. 
O no! let him speak!---say all of you what you please to me now: Say any thing that will break the current of my miserable thoughts; for we are at this moment indulging fancies as illusive as those that formerly misled me; even the cottage that we talk of, a peaceful home for my children, is no ? longer in my power. 



Bea. going up to Morgan . 
Now, my friend, this is the time for you to step forth, and make a subdued father and his innocent children happy: bestow your wealth liberally, and the blessings that will fall upon your grey head, shall well reward the toils and dangers that have earn'd it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Leading him up to Seabright . 


Sea. 
Ha! what stranger is this? I observed him not before. 


Bea. 
Speak for yourself now, Mr. Morgan, I will do no more for you. 


Sea. 
Mr. Morgan, the uncle of my Caroline! 


Mor. 
Yes, Sir Anthony, and very much disposed, if you will give him leave, to---to love---to befriend 

   

---to be to you and yours---to be the uncle and friend of you all. 

???????????????????????????????????????? speaking in a broken agitated voice. 


Sea. 
O no! I am unworthy to receive any thing from you---from the uncle of my much injured wife; but these children, Mr. Morgan---I am not too proud to ask you to be a friend to them. 



Bea. hastily to Sea.  
Poo, man! you have no real goodness in you, if you cannot perceive that he must and will be a friend to yourself also. Come, come! give him a hand of fellowship! 
putting Seabright 's hand into Morgan 's. 
Now, God ? will bless you both! 


Mor. 
If Sir Anthony will permit an old man, who has past thro' many buffetings of fortune, to draw his arm-chair by him in the evening of his life, and tell over the varied hardships he has met with, he will cheer its gloom, and make it pass more pleasantly. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Sea. presses Morgan 's hand to his breast, without speaking. 



Mrs. B. to Mor.  
Well said, and gracefully said, my good uncle! did not I tell you, you would go through your part well, if you would but trust to the dictates of your own good heart? 


Bea. 
O there is nobody, when he does what is noble and right, that does not find a way of doing it gracefully. 



Mrs. B. to Sophia , who is going up timidly to Mor.  
Yes, that is right, my dear. Come, children, 
leading the children up to him. 
gather all about him. Yes, take hold of him; don't be afraid to 

   

touch him; it does young people good to pat the cheeks of a benevolent old man. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Mor. embraces them affectionately. 



Wil. B. joining the children in caressing Mor. --- 
My dear Mr. Morgan, I love you with all my soul! ---And my sweet Sophy---my good Sophy, don't you love him too?---She is such a good girl, Mr. Morgan! 


Mor. 
So she is, William; and she must have a good husband by-and-bye to reward her. I dare ? say we shall find some body or other willing to have her. 

???????????????????????????????????????? smiling archly upon William , who looks abashed; and letting go Sophy 's hand retires behind. 



Sea. to Mor.  
I have now voice enough, my generous friend, to say that I am sensible of your goodness: but there are feelings which depress me--- 


Mor. 
Say no more about it, my good Sir; I am happy, and I would have every body to rejoice with me. 



Lord A. to Mor. leading forward Lady Sarah . 
And every body does rejoice with you, my good Sir. Permit me to assure you, that tho', perhaps, somewhat injured with the ways of the world, I have not been an unfeeling spectator of what has pass'd; and I believe Lady Sarah also has not looked upon it with indifference. 
turning to Sea.  
Now, Sir Anthony, I would, if possible, part friends with you; and I have a favour to request, which will, if 

   

it is granted, make me forget every unpleasant thing that has pass'd between us. 


Sea. 
Mention it, my Lord; I will not willingly refuse you. 


Lord A. 
My sister has just now told me, that she will leave you without regret, if you will let her have your youngest boy to live with her: I join my request to her's. 



Boy. eagerly. 
? What, take Tony away from us! no but she shant tho'! 


Sea. 
I am much obliged to you, my Lord, and to Lady Sarah also; but I cannot find in my heart to divide my children. He shall, however, visit her frequently, if she will permit him; and if she will have the goodness to forget the hasty words of a passionate man, and still take an interest in any thing that belongs to him, he will be gratified by it. 


Soph. 
And I will visit Lady Sarah too, if she will have the goodness to permit me. 


Lady S. 
I thank you, my dear; it is, perhaps, more than I deserve. 
to Mrs. B.  
And may I hope, madam, that you will forget whatever unpleasant things may have pass'd between us? 



Bea. interrupting his wife as she is about to speak. 
Now answer her pleasantly, my dear Susan! 
Mrs. B. smiles pleasantly, and gives her hand to Lady Sarah . 
Now every thing is right. O it is a pleasant thing to find that there is some good in every human being! 
Enter a Servant, and whispers to Bea.  

Is he here? let him enter then. 


   



Sea. 
Who is it? I can see nobody now. 


Bea. 
Don't be alarmed: it is a friend of your's, who has offended you, and takes a very proper season to be forgiven. It is one who durst not, in your prosperity, shew you the extent of his attachment; ? but he is now come, for he has already open'd his mind to me upon hearing of your misfortunes, to put into your hands, for the benefit of your children, all the little money he has saved, since he first began to lay up one mite after another, and to call it his own property. 


Sea. 
Who can that be? I did not think there was a creature in the world that bore us so much affection. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Robert , who starts back upon seeing so many people. 


Bea. 
Come in, my good Robert: 
taking his hand and leading him forward. 
thou need'st not be ashamed to shew thy face here: there is nobody here who will not receive thee graciously, not even Lady Sarah herself. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The children and every body gather 'round Robert . 



Sea. coming forward with Bea.  
Ah, my dear Beaumont, what a charm there is in doing good! it can give dignity to the meanest condition. Had this unlucky scheme but succeeded, for if we could have but weather'd it a little while longer it must have succeeded, I should have been--- I think I should have been, munificent as a prince. 


   



Bea. 
Ah, no more of that, my dear friend! no more of that! such thoughts are dangerous, and the enemy is still at hand: chide the deceiver away from you, even when he makes his appearance in ? the fair form of virtue. 

Back matter 

FINIS.


?
?

NOTES
^ List of speakers 

ALL
BEA
BEO
BOY
COOK
DEVIL
ELDEST BOY
FIRST SER
GAR
LADY S
LADY. S
LAND
LITTLE GIRL
LITTLE ONE
LORD A
MOR
MRS. B
NURSE
PLAU
PRO
PRY
ROB
ROBERT
ROV
SEA
SEABRIGHT
SER
SHARP
SIR C
SIR. C
SOPH
SOPHIA
SUPH
WIL
WIL. B
WILL
WILL. B

?




THE SECOND MARRIAGE: 
A COMEDY. IN FIVE ACTS. 


  


Front matter 

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

MEN: 

WOMEN: 


Seabright.
Beaumont , a worthy clergyman, who is his friend and his brother-in-law. 
Lord Allcrest . 
Sir Crafty Supplecoat . 
Plausible , a schemer. 
Prowler , his knavish follower. 
William Beaumont , son to Beaumont . 
Morgan , uncle to Seabright's first wife. 
Robert.
Gardener, Sharp, and Servants, &c.
Lady Sarah , sister to Lord Allcrest . 
Sophia , daughter to Seabright . 
Mrs. Beaumont . 
Pry , Lady Sarah 's woman. 
Landlady, Servants, &c.

Scene: Seabright's house in the country, not far from London, and a small country Inn near it. 



   


Main text 

ACT I. 

SCENE I. 

A garden: the Gardener discovered at work amongst some shrubs and flowers. Enter Robert hastily, calling to him as he enters. 


Robert. 
Stop , stop, Gardener! What are you about there? My mistress's rose trees rooted out of her favourite nook thus! Get out of this spot with your cursed wheel-barrow! If there were one spark of a christian in your heart, you would pluck the last hair off your bare scalp rather than root out these shrubs. 


Gar. 
Softly and civily, Master Robert; and answer me one question first.---If I intend to remain gardener in this family, and make my pot boil and my family thrive as I have done, whether will it be wiser in me, do you think, to obey your orders or my master's? 


   



Rob. 
And did he order you to do this? 


Gar. 
As sure as I hold this spade in my hand. 


Rob. 
I should as soon have thought of tearing the turf from my mother's grave as of doing this thing. Well, well; perhaps he has forgot that she liked them. 


Gar. 
Now I rather think he remember'd, when he gave me the orders, that another lady likes them not; and a dead woman's fancy match'd against a living woman's freak, with a middle-aged widower, hear ye me, who has just pull'd the black coat off ? his back, has but a sorry chance, Robert. 


Rob. 
Ay, and he has pull'd the black coat too soon off his back. But away with it!---I'll think no more of what you say---it is impossible. 


Gar. 
May I never handle a spade again, if she did not squint to this direct spot, with her horrid looking grey eyes, the last time she walked thro' the garden, saying it was a mass of confusion that ought to be cleared away, and he gave me the orders for doing it the very next morning. 


Rob. 
Who could have believed this? Who could have believed this but a few months ago, when she rambled thro' these walks, with all her white-frock'd train gamboling round her? 


Gar. 
Nay, good Robert, don't be so down o'the mouth about it: the loss of his wife and an unlook'd-for legacy of twenty thousand pounds, may set a man's brains a working upon new plans. There is nothing very wonderful in that, man. He will get his lady-wife and the borough 

   

together, with a power of high relations, you know, and we shall all be fine folks by and bye.--- Thou wilt become master-butler or gentleman-valet, or something of that kind, and I shall be head gardener, to be sure, with a man or two to ? obey my orders: we sha'nt be the same pains-taking folks that we have been, I warrant you, when he is a parliament man. 


Rob. 
Thou'rt always looking after something for thine own advantage, and that puts all those foolish notions into thy noddle. No, no; he has lived too sweetly in his own quiet home, amongst the rustling of his own trees and the prattling of his own infants, to go now into the midst of all that shuffling and changing and making of speeches. He'll never become a parliament man. 


Gar. 
Well then, let him marry Lady Sarah for love if he please, I'll neither make nor meddle in the matter. If she keep a good house, and give good victuals and drink to the people in it, I'll never trouble my head about it. 


Rob. 
Out upon thee, man, with thy victuals and thy drink! Thou'rt worser than a hog. Well should I like, if it were not for the sake of better folks than thee, to see thy greedy chaps exercised upon her feeding. 


Gar. 
What, is she niggardly then, and so fine a lady too? 


Rob. 
Niggardly! she will pull off her wide hoop, and all them there flounces that people go to court ? in, to search over the house for the value of a candle's 

   

end, rather than any of the poor devils belonging to her should wrong her of a doit's-worth. Thou'lt have rare feeding truly when she comes amongst us. 


Gar. 
Heaven forbid it then! No wonder thou'rt anxious she should not come here. I always wonder'd what made thee so concern'd about it. 


Rob. 
And dost thou think, swine that thou art, I am concern'd for it upon this account? Thou deservest to be fed on husks and garbage all thy life for having such a thought. I, who was the friend, I may say the relation of my good mistress for thou knowest I am her foster brother and when I look upon her poor children playing about, I feel as tho' they were my own flesh and blood. It is not that I boast of the connection: God knows I am as humble as any body! 


Gar. 
Ay, no doubt; and a rare good thing it is, this same humility. I know a poor ass, grazing on the common, not far off, that to my certain knowledge is foster brother to a very great lord, and yet, I must say that for him, I never saw him prick up his ears or even shake his tail one bit the more for it in my life. By my certics! he must be a very ? meek and sober minded ass! 

???????????????????????????????????????? singing and gathering up his tools, &c. 
Take this in your hand for me, man; I'm going to another part of the garden. 

???????????????????????????????????????? holding out something for Robert to carry. 



Rob. pushing away his hand angrily. 
Take care of it yourself, fool: you would sing tho' your father were upon the gallows. 


   



Gar. 
I crave your worship's pardon! I should have whined a little, to be sure, to have been better company to you. 
looking off the stage. 
But here comes a good man who frowns upon nobody; the worthy rector of Easterdown: I'll go and bid him welcome; for he likes to see a poor fellow hold up his head before him, and speak to him like a man. 


Rob. 
You bid him welcome, indeed! stand out of the way: I'll bid him welcome myself. He is as good as my own---No matter what. He is married to my good mistress's sister; ay, and his own father christen'd me too. I'm glad he is come. You go to him indeed! 
Enter Mr. Beaumont . 

O Sir! you're welcome to this sad place. 


Bea. 
I thank you, honest Robert; how do you do? 


Rob. 
So, so; I'm obliged to you for the favour of asking. Woe is me, Sir! but this be a sad place ? since you came last among us. 


Bea. 
A sad change, indeed, my good friend, and you seem to have felt it too. You look thin and alter'd, Robert. 


Rob. 
I ha'n't been very merry of late, and that makes a body look--- 

???????????????????????????????????????? passing his hand across his eyes. 



Bea. shaking his head. 
Ay, what must thy poor master be then, since it is even so with thee? Poor man, it grieved me to think that I could not be with him on the first shock of his distress, but illness 

   

and business of importance made it impossible for me to leave Yorkshire. How does he do? I hope you look cheerfully before him, and do all that you can to comfort him. 


Rob. 
Indeed I should have been very glad, in my homely way, to have done what I could to comfort him; but, I don't know how it is, he gets on main well without, Sir. 



Bea. surprised. 
Does he?---I'm very glad to hear it. I love him for that, now: it is a noble exertion in him; he has great merit in it, truly. 


Rob. 
Humph, humph. 

???????????????????????????????????????? a pause. 


Bea. 
What were you going to say, my good Robert? 


Rob. 
Nothing, Sir; I was only clearing my throat. 


Bea. 
? How does he sleep, Robert? 


Rob. 
I can't say, Sir, not being present when he's a-bed, you know. 


Bea. 
How does he eat, then? little rest and little food must, I fear, have brought him very low. 


Rob. 
Nay, as for the matter of his eating, I can't say but I find as good a notch made in the leg of mutton, when he dines alone, as there used to be. 


Bea. 
Well, that's good. But I fear he is too much alone. 


Rob. 
No, Sir; he has dined out a pretty deal of late. He does, indeed, walk up and down the shady walk by the orchard, and talk to himself often enough. 


   




Bea. alarmed. 
Does he? that is a sign of the deepest sorrow: I must speak to him; I must put books into his hands. 


Rob. 
O Sir, there's no need of that; he has a book in his hand often enough. 


Bea. 
And what kind of books does he read? 


Rob. 
Nay, it is always the same one. 


Bea. 
Well, he can't do better: there is but one book in the world that can't be too often in a man's hand. 


Rob. 
Very true, Sir, but it is not that one, tho'.--- ? I thought as you do myself, and so I slyly look'd over his shoulder one morning to be sure of it; but I saw nothing in it but all about the great people at court, and the great offices they hold. 


Bea. 
You astonish me, Robert. His heavy loss I fear has bewildered his wits. Poor man! poor man! and all the sweet children too! 


Rob. 
Yes Sir, they---they will feel--- 


Bea. 
What would you say, my friend. 


Rob. 
Nothing, Sir. This vile neckcloth takes me so tight round the throat, an' a plague to it! 



Gar. coming forward with a broad grin. 
God bless you, Sir! I be glad to see you here. How does your good lady and master William do? He is grown a fine young gentleman now, I warrant, he, he, he, he, he! 



Rob. to Gar. angrily. 
Can't you ask a gentleman how he does, fool, without putting that damned grin upon your face? 


   



Bea. 
Why, my friend Robert, what words are these you make use of? 


Rob. 
True Sir, I should not have used them; but when a body is vexed he will be angry, and when a body is angry, good sooth! he will e'en bolt out with the first word that comes to him ? though he were a saint. 


Bea. 
Too true, Robert; but long before a body becomes a saint, he is very seldom vexed, and still seldomer angry at any thing. 


Rob. 
God bless you, Sir! I know very well I a'n't so good as I should be, and I wish from my heart I was better. 


Bea. 
Give me your hand, honest Robert; you will soon be better if you wish to be so, and it is a very pleasant progress when once it is fairly begun. 
Looking off the stage. 
I think I see your master at a distance. Good day to you! good day to you, Gardener! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt severally. 

SCENE II. 

A parlour with a door opening into the garden. Seabright and Beaumont are seen walking together in the garden. Bea. talking to Sea. as they enter. 




Bea. continuing to talk. 
I must indeed confess, my dear friend, you had every thing that this world can bestow; a moderate fortune, with health to enjoy it; the decent, modest tranquillity, of private life, and the blessings of domestic harmony; I must, indeed, confess you were a happy man. 

   


pauses and looks at Sea. who says nothing. 
Your measure of good things was compleat; it was impossible to add to it; there was no more for you to desire on this side of heaven. 

???????????????????????????????????????? pauses again. 



Sea. answering very tardily. 
I had, indeed, many of the comforts of life. 


Bea. 
Many of the comforts of life! you had every thing the heart of man can desire; and, pardon me, you could afford to lose part of your felicity, dear as that part might be, and still retain enough to make life worth the cherishing. To watch over your rising family; to mark the hopeful progress of their minds; to foster every good disposition and discourage every bad one found there: this, my friend, is a noble, an invigorating task, most worthy of a man. 


Sea. 
It is certainly the duty of every man to attend to the education of his children: their fortunes ? in the world depend upon it. 



Bea. looking displeased at him. 
Poo! their fortunes in that world from which this will appear but like a nest of worms, a hole for grubs and chrysalis's, that world which is our high and native home, depend upon it. 
walking up and down disturbed, and then returning to Sea. with a self-upbraiding look. 
Forgive me, Seabright! you know I am sometimes thus, but my spark is soon extinguished. I am glad---I ought to be glad to see you so composed. It is a noble conquest you have gain'd over your feelings, and what must it not have cost you! Give me your hand, and be not thus constrained with me: I know the weakness of 

   

human nature, and dearly do I sympathize with you. 


Sea. 
You are very kind, my friend; but you have travelled far; you must want refreshment; let me order something. 

???????????????????????????????????????? going to the door and calling a Servant , to whom he gives orders. 



Bea. aside. 
Well, there is something here I don't understand. But I am wrong, perhaps: Some people can't bear to have the subject of their sorrow touched upon: I'll talk to him of other things.--- 
Aloud to Sea. as he returns from the door. 
Your old acquaintance, Asby of Gloucestershire, called upon me a day or two before I left home, and enquired kindly after you. He is a very rich ? man now; he has purchased the great estate of Carriswood, near his native place, and is high sheriff of the country. 



Sea. becoming suddenly animated. 
What, Asby? my old school-fellow Asby? that is a great rise, by my soul! The estate of Carriswood, and high sheriff of the county! What interest has pushed him? what connexions has he made? has he speculated with his money? how has he advanced himself? 


Bea. 
I can't very well tell you: he has gone on, like many others, turning, and scraping and begging, and managing great people's matters for them, till he has become one of the most considerable men in that part of the country. 


Sea. 
He must be a clever fellow. We used to think him stupid at school, but we have been dev'lishly deceived. 


   



Bea. 
No, you have not, for he is stupid still. His brother, the poor curate of Crofton, is a clever man. 



Sea. contemptuously. 
The poor curate of Crofton! One of those clever men, I suppose, who sit with their shoes down o' the heel, by their own study fire, brooding o'er their own hoard of ideas, without ? ever being able from their parts or their learning to produce one atom's worth of good to themselves or their families. I have known many such: but let me see a man, who from narrow and unfavorable beginnings, shapes out his own way in this changing world to wealth and distinction, and, by my faith! he will be wise enough for me. 


Bea. 
My friend, you become animated: I am happy to see you so much interested in the fortune of others; it is a blessed disposition. I have something also to tell you of your old friend Malton, which I am sure will give you pleasure. 


Sea. 
What, he has got a fortune too, I suppose, and is standing for the country. 


Bea. 
No; something better than that, my friend. 


Sea. 
Ha! Well, some people get on amazingly! 


Bea. 
It is amazing, indeed, for it was altogether, hopeless. You remember his only son, the poor little boy that was so lame and so sickly? 


Sea. 
Yes, I do. 


Bea. 
Well, from some application, which I cannot remember at present, the sinews of his leg have recovered their proper tone again, and he is growing up as healthy a comely looking lad as you can see. 


   



Sea. 
O, that is what you meant---I am glad to ? hear it, certainly; a cripple in a family is not easily provided for. But pray now, let me understand this matter more perfectly. 


Bea. 
I tell you I have forgot how they treated the leg, but--- 



Sea. impatiently. 
No, no, no! What relations, what connexions had Asby to push him? a man can't get on without some assistance:---his family, I always understood, was low and distress'd. 


Bea. 
He had two or three ways of getting on, which I would not advise any friend of mine to follow him in, and the worst of them all was making what is called a convenient marriage. 



Sea. affecting to laugh. 
Ha, ha, ha! you are severe, Beaumont: many a respectable man has suffered interest to determine even his choice of a wife. Riches and honours must have their price paid for them. 


Bea. 
Trash and dirt! I would not have a disagreeable vixen to tyrannise over my family for the honours of a peerage. 


Sea. 
Well, well! people think differently upon most subjects. 


Bea. 
They do indeed; and it is not every one who thinks so delicately, and has so much reason to do ? so, upon this subject, as we have, my dear Seabright. Our wives--- 



Sea. interrupting him hastily. 
And he comes in for the county, you say? 


   



Bea. 
No, no, Seabright! you mistake me: high sheriff of the county, I said. How you do interest yourself in the fortunes of this man! 


Sea. 
And what should surprise you in this? By heaven there is nothing so interesting to me as to trace the course of a prosperous man through this varied world! First he is seen like a little stream, wearing its shallow bed through the grass; circling, and winding, and gleaning up its treasures from every twinkling rill as it passes: farther on the brown sand fences its margin, the dark rushes thicken on its side: farther on still, the broad flags shake their green ranks, the willows bend their wide boughs o'er its course: and yonder, at last, the fair river appears, spreading his bright waves to the light! 



Bea. staring strangely on him, then turning away some paces, and shaking his head ruefully 
Poor man! poor man! his intellects are deranged: he is not in his senses. 

Enter a Servant . 




Sea. to Ser.  
Very well. 
to Bea.  
Let us go to the breakfast room, Beaumont, and you'll find ? something prepared for you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? As they are about to go out, the children appear at a distance in the garden. 



Bea. looking out. 
Ha! yonder are the children! Blessings on them! I must run and speak to them first. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit into the garden to the children. 



Sea. to himself, looking contemptuously after Bea.  
Ay, go to the children! thou art only fit company for them! To come here with his comfort and his 

   

condolence full eight months and a-half after her death ---he is a mere simpleton! His wonderful delicacy too about interested marriages---he is worse than a simpleton! And my only business now, forsooth! must be to stay at home and become schoolmaster to my own children!---he is an absolute fool! 
turning round and seeing the servant still standing at the door. 
Have you enquired at the village which of the inns my Lord Lubberford stops at on his way to town? 


Ser. 
Yes, Sir; but they don't know. 


Sea. 
But they must know! Go and make farther enquiries, for I must pay my respects to his Lordship as he passes. Were the fruit and the flowers carried to Lady Sarah this morning? 


Ser. 
I don't know, Sir. 


Sea. 
Run to the gardener, and put him in mind of it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 

SCENE III. 

A library. Enter Seabright , who walks several times slowly across the stage as if deeply engaged in his own mind, then stops short with a considerable pause. 



Sea. 
I am now upon the threshold of distinction, and with one step more I cross it. On this side lies spiritless obscurity; on that, invigorating honour. 
pauses. 
Member of Parliament! there is magic in the words, and of most powerful operation.---Let that man find a place elsewhere; why should I squeeze myself and every body round me to make 

   

room for him? Sir, he's a Member of Parliament. ---Let that fool hold his tongue there; why do we silently listen to all his prosing stuff? Sir, he's a Member of Parliament.---What; bells ringing, children huzzaing, corporation men sweating at this rate, to welcome that poor looking creature to your town? To be sure; he's a Member of Parliament. ---Ay, so it is! I too have mixed with the ignoble crowd to stare upon men thus honoured. I have only now to over-step the bounds, and be myself the very thing I gazed at. 
pausing again. 
---There is indeed a toll, a price of entrance that must be paid, and my heart stands back from it; but there is no other way than this, and what I would wear I must purchase. O it is well worth its price! To be but known and named as filling such a place in society brings pleasure with it. And in the eyes of ? our early friends too---Methinks I can see at this moment every curious face in my native village gathering about the letter-boy, as he sets out upon his rounds, to look with grinning admiration upon my first franks. "Free, Seabright;" ha, ha, ha! 

???????????????????????????????????????? laughing to himself and rubbing his hands together with great complacency. 
Enter Robert . 




Sea. turning round shortly like one who is caught. 
What brings you here, sirrah? 


Rob. 
You desired me to tell you, Sir, when Miss Seabright returned from her walk. 



Sea. with his countenance changed. 
And is she so soon returned? 


   



Rob. 
Yes Sir, and I have told her you wish to speak with her. 


Sea. 
You have told her---I wish---I looked not for her so soon---I wish you had not--- 


Rob. 
Sir! 


Sea. 
Begone! begone! and say I am waiting for her. 
Exit Rob. stealing a look of observation at his master as he goes out. 
---Ah! here comes the hard pull! here comes the sticking place! I should have prepared her for this before, but my heart would not suffer me. O that I had employed some one else to tell her! She little thinks of this! I hear her coming 
listening; while children's voices are heard without. 
What, she is bringing the children with her! I hear the little one prating as he ? goes. O God! I cannot---I cannot! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit running out with much agitation. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Sophia , carrying a little boy on her back, and an elder boy and girl taking hold of her gown. 



Soph. to the little one . 
You have had a fine ride and a long ride, have you not? 


Little One. 
Yesh, tit. 


Soph. 
Come down then, boy, for your horse is tired. 


Little One. 
No, tit. 


Soph. 
No, tit! but you must tho' 
setting him down. 
Stand upon your fat legs there, and tell me what I'm to have for all this trouble of carrying you. What am I to have, urchin? 


Little One. 
Kish. 


   




Soph. after kissing him affectionately. 
And what am I to have for these comfits I have saved for you? 


Little One. 
Kish. 



Soph. kissing him again. 
And what am I to have for the little dog I bought for you this morning? 


Little One. 
Kish. 


Soph. 
What, kish again? Kish for every thing? 
kissing him very tenderly. 
O you little rogue! you might buy the whole world for such money as this, if every body loved you as I do. Now children, papa is not ready to see us yet, I find, so in the mean time, I'll divide the little cake I promised ? you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? taking a little cake from her work-bag and dividing it; whilst Robert , peeping in at the door and seeing Seabright not there, ventures in, and stands for a little while looking tenderly upon Soph. and the children. 


Rob. 
God bless all your sweet faces! 


Soph. 
What do you want here, good Robert? 


Rov. 
Nothing---nothing.---God bless you all, my pretty ones! 
listening. 
I hear him coming. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit, looking piteously upon them, as he goes off. 


Soph. 
I hear papa coming. 


Little Girl. 
I'll run and meet him. 


Eldest Boy. 
Don't Emma! he does not like to play with us now; it is troublesome to him. 


Little Girl. 
When mama was alive he play'd with us. 


Soph. 
Hush! my good girl. 

   

Enter Seabright . 

We have been waiting for you, papa; Robert told us you wanted to see us all together. 


Sea. 
Did Robert tell you so? I wanted to see you alone, Sophia, but since it is so, the others may remain. I have got something to say to you. 


Soph. 
You look very grave, my dear Sir: have I offended you? 


Eldest Boy. 
It was I who broke the china vase, so don't be angry with her for that. 


Sea. 
My brave boy! it is distress, and not anger, that makes me grave. 


Soph. 
And are you distress'd, papa? O don't be distress'd! we will do every thing that we can ? to please you. I know very well we can't make you so happy as when mama was alive; but we will be such good children! we will obey you, and serve you, and love you so much, if you will but play with us, and look upon us again as you used to do! 



Sea. softened. 
My dear girl, I wish I could make you all happy: I wish to raise your situation in the world above the pitch of my present confined abilities: I wish--- 
stops and is much embarrassed. 



Soph. kissing his hand. 
My dear, dear father! you say that I am your dear girl, and I promise you you shall find me a good one. I want no better fortune in the world, than to live with you and be useful to you. I can overlook the household matters, and order every thing in the family as you would like to have it. I want no better fortune 

   

than this: I shall be a happy girl and a proud girl too, if you will put confidence in me. 



Sea. taking her hand tenderly. 
My sweet child! this would be a dull and sombre life for a young girl like you: you ought now to be dressed and fashioned like other young people, and have the advantage of being introduced to the world by those who--- 


Soph. 
? O no! I don't care whether my gown be made of silk or of linen: and as for being dull, never trouble your head about that; we shall find a way to get the better of it. Do you know, papa,--- but I am almost ashamed to tell it you.--- 


Sea. 
What is it, my dear. 


Soph. 
I have been learning to play at backgammon: for you know mama and you used to play at it of a winter evening; and I'll play with you, if you will allow me. 


Sea. 
O God! O God! this is too much! 

???????????????????????????????????????? turns from them in great agitation, and running to the opposite side of the room, stands leaning his back against the wall, whilst Sophia and the children gather round him. 


Soph. 
My dear father! what is the matter? 


Eldest Boy. 
Are you not well, papa? 


Sea. 
I am well enough! I am well enough! but I have something to tell you, and I cannot tell it. 


Soph. 
For God's sake let me know what it is! 


Sea. 
You must know it: it is necessary that you should. I am--- 

???????????????????????????????????????? pauses. 


Soph. 
A bankrupt. 


   



Sea. 
No, no, no! I am going to be married.--- 
 Sophia staggers some paces back, and stands like one perfectly stupified. 
What is the matter, Sophia? are you going to faint? 


Soph. 
No, I sha'n't faint. 


Sea. 
Be not so overcome with it, my dear child! ? it is for the good of my children I marry. 
pauses and looks at her, but she is silent. 
You, and all children in your situation, look upon these matters with a prejudiced eye. It is my great regard for you that determines me to take this step. 
pauses, but she is silent. 
Do you hear me? Will you not speak to me? 


Soph. 
O my poor mother! little did I think when I kiss'd your cold hands, that you would so soon be forgotten! 


Sea. 
No more of this, my dear! no more of this! It is improper; it is painful to me. I have not forgotten ---I love---I respect---I adore her memory: but I am engaged---it is necessary---your interest, is concerned in it, my dear children; and I know, my good Sophia, you will not add to your father's distress by stubborn and undutiful behaviour. 


Soph. 
O no, my dear Sir! if you love and adore her memory I am satisfied. Yet, if you do, how can you---O how can you!---I will say no more: God bless you and give you a good wife! 
weeping. 
But she will never be so good as my mother: she will never love you as my mother did. 


Sea. 
Forbear, my good girl! I know it very well; and I don't marry now to be beloved. But Lady ? Sarah is a very good woman, and will make me as 

   

happy as I can expect to be: she is sister to Lord Allcrest, you know, and is related to the first people of the country. 


Soph. 
Good heaven, Sir! you can't mean to marry Lady Sarah: all the world knows how ill-temper'd she is. 


Eldest Boy. 
What, that lady with the cunning-looking nose, and the strange staring eye-brows? If she come into this house I'll cast my top at her. 


Soph. 
Hold your tongue; George! papa is not so hard hearted as to set such a woman over us. Come, come, children! gather round and hold up your little hands to him: he will have pity upon you. 
the children gather round, and Sophia , putting the hands of the youngest child together and holding them up, kneels down before him. 
O Sir! have pity on them! We have nobody to plead for us, and I cannot speak. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Robert with his face all blubbered, and throwing himself upon his knees by the children, holds up his hands most piteously. 


Rob. 
O, Sir! 



Sea. bursting into a violent rage. 
What, sirrah! have you been listening at the door? Go from my presence this moment! 


Soph. 
Dear Sir! be not angry with him! 



Sea. putting her away. 
No, no! let us have no more of this nonsense: I have listen'd too long to it ? already. 

???????????????????????????????????????? breaks from them and exit. 


Rob. 
I wish my head had been cut off before I had come in with my ill-timed assistance! Curse 

   

upon my stupid pate! I deserve to be hang'd for it. 
beating his head and grasping his hair. 
O my pretty ones! I sent you all to him that you might work on his heart, for I knew what he wanted to say well enough, and yet I must needs thrust in my silly snout amongst you to mar all! For a man that can read books and cast accounts, and all that, to do such a trick! I deserve to be cudgel'd! 


Soph. 
Don't be so angry at yourself, Robert: you meant it well, and you have always been so good to us! 


Rob. 
Good to you! I love you like my own flesh and blood, every one of you; and if any body dare to do you wrong, I'll---no matter what. 
clenching his fist and nodding significantly. 
He may turn me off if he please; but I'll not quit the neighbourhood: I'll watch over you, my pretty ones; and hang me if any one shall hurt a hair of your heads! 


Soph. 
I thank you, Robert: but don't tell any body: that would not be right, you know. Come, children; you shall go with me to my own room. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Sophia and children by one side, and exit Robert by the other, looking after them with tenderness and pity. 
END OF THE FIRST ACT.


   


ACT II. 

SCENE I. 

Before the front of Seabright 's house. 

Enter Plausible and Prowler . 



Plau. 
Do you wait for me in that farther walk yonder, till I come from visiting my subject. 


Pro. 
Well, God grant he prove a good subject! we are woundily in want of one at present. 


Plau. 
Don't lose courage, man; there is always a certain quantity of good and of bad luck put into every man's lot, and the more of the one that has past over his head, the more he may expect of the other. Seabright has a fortune to speculate with, and some turn, as I have been told, for speculation: he is just launching into a new course of life, and I have a strong presentiment that I shall succeed with him. 


Pro. 
Now away with your presentiments! for we have never yet had any good luck that has not come pop upon our heads like a snow-ball, from the very opposite point to our expectation: but he has got an unexpected legacy lately; and I have observed that a sum coming in this way, to a man of a certain disposition, very often plays the part of a decoy-bird to draw away from him all the rest of his money: there I rest my hopes. 


   



Plau. 
Why you talk as if I were going to ruin him, instead of encreasing his fortune by my advice. 


Pro. 
? I have seen ruin follow every man that has been favour'd with your advice, as constantly as the hind legs follow the fore legs of a horse, and therefore I cannot help thinking there must be some connexion between them. However, I don't pretend to reason, Plausible: it might only be some part of their bad luck that happen'd just at those times to be passing over their heads; and they have always, in the mean time, supplied you and your humble follower with money for our immediate wants. 


Plau. 
Well, hold your tongue, do! 
knocks at the door, which is opened by Robert . 
Is your master at home? 


Rob. 
Yes. 


Plau. 
Can he be spoken with? 


Rob. 
No, Sir, he can't see you at present. 


Plau. 
At what hour can I see him? 


Rob. 
I don't know, Sir. 


Plau. 
Is he so much engaged? But you seem sad, my friend: has any thing happened? You had a funeral in the house some months ago? 


Rob. 
Yes, Sir; but it is a wedding we have got in it at this bout. 


Plau. 
I had the honour of calling on Mr. Seabright ? yesterday morning, but he was not at home. 


   



Rob. 
Yes, Sir; he has been at the borough of Crockdale to be chair'd, and the parish of Upperton to be married; and he returned last night--- 


Pro. 
Bridegroom and Member of Parliament! 


Rob. 
Keep your jokes till they are ask'd for. 


Pro. 
They would be stale jokes indeed, then. 



Plau. to Pro.  
Hold your tongue, pray. 
to Rob.  
He is engaged? 


Rob. 
Yes, Sir; he is with the bride and the company, in the garden, at breakfast. 


Plau. 
Well, I shan't disturb him at present.--- Here is a crown for you: you will recollect my face again when you see it? I'll call again very soon. 



Pro. aside. 
Mercy upon us! the last crown we have in the world given away on such a chance! It shan't go tho'. 


Rob. 
O yes, Sir, I'll recollect you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Plausible . 



Pro. lingering behind. 
Don't shut the door yet. Hark you, my good Mr. John, for I know your name very well! 


Rob. 
My name is Robert. 


Pro. 
Yes, Robert I said. 


Rob. 
Did you so, truly! have not I ears in my ? head? 


Pro. 
Assuredly Sir, and ears, let me tell you, that will hear good news soon, if you will be counsell'd by me. 


Rob. 
Anan? 


Pro. 
Have you never a mind to put out a little money to advantage? a guinea or so, now, in such 

   

a way as to return to you again with fifteen or twenty of his yellow-coated brethren at his back? 


Rob. 
Poo with your nonsense! I have sent two or three guineas out upon such fools errands already. 


Pro. 
And did they come back empty handed to you? 


Rob. 
No, by my faith! for they never came back at all. 


Pro. 
O lud, lud! there be such cheats in this world, they frighten honest folks from trying their fortune. I have got a crown of my own, just now, and with another crown put to it by any good hearted fellow that would go halves with me in the profit, I have an opportunity of making a good round sum, at present, in a very honest way, that would almost make a man of me at once: but I'm sure I don't advise you to do it; for prudence is a great virtue; prudence is a very great virtue. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Bell rings, and Robert stands hesitating. 


Rob. 
? Hang it! a crown is no great matter after all. There it is 
giving him the crown whilst the bell rings again. 
How that plaguy bell rings! When you get the money for me, you'll know where to call? 


Pro. 
Never fear! when I get the money for you, I'll find my way back again, I warrant you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE II. 

A garden, with a temple seen at some distance, in which are discovered Lady Sarah, Sophia , Mr. and Mrs. Beaumont , and William Beaumont , as if seated after breakfast; whilst Gardener and one or two of the Servants skulk near the front of the stage, behind some bushes, looking at them. 



Gar. 
Bride indeed! she's as unlovely a looking piece of goods as ever I look'd upon. See how she stares at every thing about her, and curls up her nose like a girkin! I'll warrant you she'll be all thro' my kitchen grounds by-and-by, to count over my cabbages. 


First Ser. 
Hold your tonge, man: we're too long here: see, they are all breaking up now, and some of them will be here in a trice. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Servants . 

???????????????????????????????????????? The company come out from the temple, and Mr. and Mrs. Beaumont advance to the front of the stage, talking together earnestly. 



Bea. continuing to talk. 
Nay, my dear, you are prejudiced and severe; it did not strike me that she behaved to you with so much forbidding coldness. She has an ungracious countenance to be sure, but now and then when it relaxes, she looks as if she had some good in her. 


Mrs. B. 
Yes, Charles, you find always some good in every one of God's creatures. 


Bea. 
And there is some good in every one of God's creatures, if you would but look for it. 


   



Mrs. B. 
I'm sure those who can find it out in her have a quicker discernment than I can pretend to. How unlucky it was that we came to the house last night, without enquiring before hand the state of the family! I thought I should have fainted ? when they told me of the marriage; and when I saw that creature in my sweet sister's place! 


Bea. 
I pitied you, my dear Susan, very much, indeed I did; but it would have look'd pettish and unforgiving in us to have gone away again at that late hour; and I think we must stay with them till to-morrow. For the children's sake we must endeavour to be on good terms with them. But here come William and Sophia. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter William Beaumont and Sophia , talking as they enter. 


Wil. 
You like the yellow-streak'd carnations best? 


Soph. 
Yes, I think they are the prettiest, tho' we have but very few of them. 


Wil. 
O then I'll make our gardener sow a whole bushel of carnation-seed when I get home, that we may have a good chance, at least, of raising some of the kind you admire. And what else can I do for you, Sophy? Shall I copy some of my friend's verses for you? or send you some landscapes for your drawing-book? or---did not you say you should like to have a rocking-horse for little Tony? 


Soph. 
Indeed you are very good, cousin. 


   



Wil. 
No, no! don't say that: there is no goodness at all in doing any thing for you. 



Soph. going up to Mrs. B. who puts her arm affectionately round her. 
My dear aunt! 


Wil. 
? Ah, mother! see how tall she has grown since we saw her last, and how dark her hair is now. 



Mrs. B. archly. 
You like fair hair best, I believe, William. 


Wil. 
I like fair hair! I can't endure it! 



Mrs. B. smiling. 
Well, well, you need not be so vehement in expressing your dislike. 


Bea. 
Here comes Lady Sarah to join us: this at least is civil, you will confess. 



Lady S. coming forward to join them. 
You are fond, Ma'am, I perceive, of the shade, from prefering this side of the garden. 
formally to Mrs. B. who coldly bows assent. 
It is a very pleasant morn-for travelling, Mr. Beaumont. 


Bea. 
Yes, Madam, it is a very pleasant morning for travelling. 


Lady S. 
I'm sorry, however, that you will have so much dust on your road to town. 



Soph. to Mrs. B.  
Why you don't go to day, aunt? I thought you were to stay longer. 


Mrs. B. 
No, my dear, we go this morning. 

???????????????????????????????????????? looking significantly to Beaumont . 


Lady S. 
Would not the cool of the evening be more agreeable? 


Mrs. B. 
No, Ma'am, the coolness of this morning has been quite enough to induce us to set out ? immediately. 


   

Enter Servant . 




Ser. to Lady S.  
Some poor people from the village are come to wish your Ladyship health and happiness. 



Lady S. ungraciously. 
I am obliged to them.--- What do they mean? Ay, ay! tell them I am obliged to them. You need not wait; that is all. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Ser. whilst Mrs. B. smiles significantly to her husband. 


Soph. 
I wonder if my old friend, Huskins, be amongst them: I'll run and see. 

???????????????????????????????????????? going to run out. 


Lady S. 
Perhaps, Miss Seabright, will do me the honour to consult me upon what friendships are proper for her to cultivate. 



Mrs. B. seeing Sophia distressed. 
If your Ladyship will permit us, she shall retire with me for a little. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Mrs. B. and Sophia. 



Wil. aside to his father, as they are about to follow them. 
What an ugly witch it is! must we leave Sophia with her? 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Beaumont and William B. Lady Sarah looking after them suspiciously. 
Enter Seabright . 




Lady S. turning to him with affected sprightliness. 
So you have been upon the watch, I suppose, and will not suffer me to stroll thro' these shady walks alone: I am positively to have no time to myself. 


Sea. 
You don't call me an intruder, I hope? 


Lady S. 
Indeed if you become very troublesome, I don't know what I may call you. He, he, he! 
laughing foolishly. Seabright putting his hand up to 

   

the side of her hat, she pushes it away with pretended coyness. 
How can you be so childish! he, he, he! 



Sea. gravely. 
? Won't you let me pick a caterpillar from your ribband? 



Lady S. looking foolish and disappointed. 
O! is that it? I am much obliged to you: but you are always so good, so tenderly attentive to me! Indeed this little hand was well bestow'd upon you, Seabright: I wish it had convey'd to you a better gift when it gave away myself. 

???????????????????????????????????????? thrusting out a great brown hand to him. 



Sea. raising it to his lips with affected tenderness. 
What could it possibly convey, my dear Lady Sarah, more--- 
stopping short as he is about to kiss it. 
It that a family ring upon your finger? 


Lady S. 
Yes, it was my mother's: why so? 


Sea. 
The arms of the Highcastles' are upon it: Lord Highcastle then is your relation? 


Lady S. 
I am nearly related to him. 



Sea. with his countenance brightening. 
I did not know this: by my soul I am glad of it! He is in credit with the minister: you are on good terms with him, I hope. 


Lady S. 
Yes, I have always taken pains to be upon terms with him. 


Sea. 
I dare say you have; I dare say you have: you have so much prudence, and so many good qualities, my dear love! 

???????????????????????????????????????? kissing her hand with great alacrity. 


Lady S. 
O it is all your blind partiality! 
putting her hand tenderly upon his shoulder. 
? Do you know, 

   

my dear Mr. Seabright, that coat becomes you very much: I wish you would always wear that colour. 


Sea. 
I'll wear any thing you like, my dear. But, by-the-bye, my constituents at Crockdale, have a manufacture of woollen in the town: I must buy two or three hundred yards of their stuff from them, I believe, lest I should have occasion to be elected again. 



Lady S. taking her hand eagerly off his shoulder. 
Two or three hundred yards of stuff from them! Why the cheapest kind they make is eightpence-halfpenny a yard: only consider what that will come to. 


Sea. 
No very great sum! 


Lady S. 
I am surprised to hear you say so! Now I should think if you were to send the mayor and aldermen a haunch of venison now and then when it comes in your way, and the earliest information of any great public events that may occur, it would be a more delicate and pleasing attention. 


Sea. 
Well, well, my dear Lady Sarah, don't let us fall out about it. 


Lady S. 
I am perfectly good humoured, I assure you; but you are so--- 


Sea. 
? Yonder is your maid coming to speak to you, I'll leave you. 


Lady S. 
Indeed she has nothing to say: I won't suffer her to break in upon our tender conversation. 


   



Sea. 
But I must go to give directions about accommodating Lord Allcrest and his friend. They will be here soon. 


Lady S. 
Nay, there you have no occasion to give yourself any trouble: leave every thing of that kind to me: you are too profuse, and too careless, in every thing. 


Sea. 
I may at least go to the stables and give my groom orders to provide oats for their horses. 


Lady S. 
I have a very good receipt in my receipt book for feeding horses upon the refuse of a garden. 



Sea. shaking his head, and breaking away from her. 
No, no! that won't do. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 
Enter Pry with a busy face. 



Lady S. 
What brings you here, Pry? Did not you see Mr. Seabright with me? 


Pry. 
I protest, my Lady, I have been looking at so many things this morning, I can't tell what is before my eyes. 


Lady S. 
You have look'd over every thing then as I desired you: and I hope you have done it as if it were to satisfy your own curiosity. 


Pry. 
? To be sure, my Lady; and I might say so with truth too, for nothing does my heart so much good as looking thro' all them there places. And O dear, my Lady! the chests, and the wardrobes, and the larders, and the store-rooms, that I have look'd into! but that cunning fellow, Robert, would not let me into the wine-cellar tho'. 


   



Lady S. 
And you are sure you let them understand it was all to please your own curiosity. 


Pry. 
To be sure; and I was glad I could speak the truth too, for I never does tell a lie but when I cannot get a turn served without it. I remember, my Lady, you told me long ago that this was the best rule; and I have always held you up, my Lady, for an ensample. Lord have mercy upon their souls that will tell you over a pack of lies for no other purpose but to make people laugh! And there is all your writers of books too, full of stories from one end to the other, what will become of them, poor sinners? 


Lady S. 
Never trouble your head about them: what have you seen? 


Pry. 
O dear me! the sheets and the table-linen, and the pickles, and the sweetmeats, and the hams, and the bacon that I have seen? 


Lady S. 
? Indeed, Pry! 


Pry. 
But do you know, my Lady, there is a curious place in the house. 


Lady S. 
What is it, pray? 


Pry. 
A closet where they keep cordials for poor people. 



Lady S. sourly. 
Humph. 


Pry. 
It was kept for that purpose by the late Mrs. Seabright, and this young lady, I am told, is as fond of it as her mother was. 


Lady S. 
Humph---every body has some maggot or other. 


   



Pry. 
Certainly, my Lady, but this is a very strange one tho'. For you must know, my Lady, I thought no harm just to taste one of the bottles myself, thinking it might be some pennyroyal-water or blackberry-wine, or such things as charitable ladies give away; but I protest it is as good liquor as any gentlewoman would chuse to keep for her own use. 


Lady S. 
I believe it has run in your head, Pry? 


Pry. 
No, no, my Lady; whatever I may do by myself when I have a pain in my stomach, or such like, for nobody can help afflictions when it pleases heaven to send them, I never takes more than is creditable ? before people.---And, O my Lady! the pans of milk, and the butter, that I have seen in the dairy! And I assure you, my Lady, the servants make good use of it: they make spare of nothing: the very kitchen maids have cream to their tea. 


Lady S. 
Well, well; we shall see how long this rioting will last. 


Pry. 
And I have been in the garden and the orchard too---But stop! I hear a noise in the bushes. 



Lady S. looking round alarmed. 
Why did you talk so loud, you gossiping fool? Come with me into the house. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Lady Sarah and Pry , looking round alarmed. 


   


???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Gardener , creeping from amongst the bushes, and shaking his fist and making faces after them. 


Gar. 
I have been in the garden and the orchard too! hang'd jade! we shall see who comes off winner at last. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

SCENE III. 

Enter Seabright followed by Robert . 




Sea. speaking as he enters. 
And he'll call again, you say? his name is Plausible. 


Rob. 
Yes, Sir; he is a very grave sensible looking man. 


Sea. 
And has nobody else call'd? 


Rob. 
No, Sir. 


Sea. 
No letters for me? 


Rob. 
No, Sir. 


Sea. 
Nobody applying for franks? 


Rob. 
No, Sir. 



Sea. aside. 
Stupid dolts! 
aloud. 
So much the better. Be in the way when I call for you. 
Exit Robert . 
Well, this is strange enough: no body soliciting; no body coming to pay their court to me; no body asking me even for a frank: it is very strange! 
after musing some time. 
Hah! but there is a bad spirit in men, which makes them always unwilling at first to acknowledge the superiority of him who has been more nearly on a level with themselves. It is only when they see him firmly establish'd, and advancing in the path of honours, that they are forced to respect him. 
after walking across 

   

the stage proudly. 
And they shall see me advance. I am not a man to stop short at such beginnings ? as these, after the high connexions I have made: I feel that I am born for advancing. The embarrassment of public affairs at present, offers my activity a fair field for exertion. 
A great noise and clamour heard without. 
What is that? Who waits there? 
Enter Robert . 

What a cursed clamour and noise is this I hear? 


Rob. 
Only my Lady, Sir, who has been all over the house with Mrs. Pry, and laying down some prudent regulations for the family. 


Sea. 
And what have the servants to say to that? 


Rob. 
A pretty deal, Sir: they are no wise mealy mouthed about the matter; and they're all coming to your honour with it in a body. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The noise without still coming nearer. 


Sea. 
Don't let the angry fools come to me; I'll have nothing to do with it. Go tell them so. 


Rob. 
Very well, Sir; I'll be sure to tell them, he, he, he! 


Sea. 
What, sirrah! is it a joke for you? 


Rob. 
I didn't laugh, Sir. 



Sea. very angry. 
But you did, you damn'd fool! 



Voices without. 
I'll tell his honour of it, that I will. His honour is a good master, and has always kept his house like a gentleman. 


Sea. 
Did not I tell you not to let those angry ? ideots come to me. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit by the opposite side from the noise, in great haste, whilst Robert pushes 

   

back the crowd of servants, who are seen pressing in at the door. 


Rob. 
Get along all of you! his honour won't be disturb'd. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt; a great clamour heard as they retire. 

SCENE IV. 

Lady Sarah 's dressing-room. Enter Lady Sarah , followed by Sophia , carrying a work-basket in her hand, which she sets upon a work-table and sits down to work. 




Lady S. sitting down by her. 
Now I hope, Miss Seabright, I may flatter myself with having more of your company this morning than you generally favour me with. If Lord Allcrest does not come at an early hour, we shall have time for a good deal of work. When a young lady is industrious, and is not always reading nonsensical books, or running up and down after children, or watering two or three foolish flower-pots on her window, she can do a great many things for herself, that enable her to appear better dress'd than girls who are more expensive. 
pausing. 
You don't answer me. 


Soph. 
Indeed, Ma'am, I had better not, for I don't know what to say. 


Lady S. 
You are a very prudent young lady, indeed, to make that a reason for holding your tongue. 


Soph. 
It is a reason, indeed, which elder ladies do not always attend to. 


   



Lady S. 
What gown is that you have put on today? It makes you look like a child from the nursery.---Mr. Supplecoat is to accompany Lord Allcrest, who is a very promising young man, of good expectations, and I could have wish'd you ? had dress'd to more advantage. There is a young friend of mine, scarcely a year older than yourself, who is just going to be married to one of the best matches in the country; and it is of great importance to have a daughter of a large family well and early settled in life. 



Soph. looking very much surprized. 
O how different! My poor mother used to say, that young women ought not to be married too early, but wait till they had sense to conduct themselves at the head of a family. 


Lady S. 
Some of them would wait till they were pretty well wrinkled then. 


Soph. 
It must be confessed that some, who do wait till they are pretty well wrinkled, are fain at last to marry without it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Voices heard without. 



Lady S. rising quickly. 
It is my brother's voice: he is come early. 

Enter Seabright , Lord Allcrest , and Sir Crafty Supplecoat . 



Lady S. 
My dear brother, I am rejoiced to see you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? holding out her hand to Lord Allcrest , who salutes her, and then courtesying very graciously to Sir Crafty . 


Lord A. 
I am happy to see you look so well, sister. 


   



Sir C. 
Lady Sarah looks as a bride ought to look, fair and chearful. 


Lady S. 
And Mr. Supplecoat talks as a courtier ? ought to talk, I need not say how. 


Lord A. 
I beg pardon! let me have the pleasure of introducing Sir Crafty Supplecoat to your Ladyship. 


Lady S. 
Every new honour that Sir Crafty acquires must give me pleasure. And permit me to introduce to your Lordship, Mr. Seabright's---I mean my daughter, who has many good qualities to make her worthy of your esteem. 

???????????????????????????????????????? presenting Sophia to Lord All. and then to Sir Crafty , who afterwards modestly shrinks back, behind Lady S.  



Sea. aside to Lady S. pulling her by the sleeve. 
What, is he made a baronet? 



Lady S. aside. 
Yes. 



Sea. aside. 
A baronet, not a knight? 



Lady S. aside. 
No, no! a baronet, certainly. 



Sea. aloud. 
Permit me again to say how happy I am to see your Lordship in this house: I hope you and Sir Crafty will not run away from us so soon as your letter gave us reason to fear. 


Lord A. 
You are very obliging, my good Sir; but my time, as you may suppose, is of some little importance at present, and not altogether at my own command. 


Sir C. 
His Lordship's time has been so long devoted to the public, that he begins to believe it has a right to it. 


   




Lord A. affecting humility. 
Why, I have been ? placed, without any merit of my own, in a situation which gives my country some claims upon me: ever since the time of Gilbert, third Earl of Allcrest, the chiefs of my family have pursued one uniform line of public conduct. 


Sir C. 
For which they have been rewarded with one uniform stream of ministerial approbation.--- Changes of men and of measures have never been able to interrupt the happy and mutual uniformity. 


Lord A. 
I believe, indeed, without the imputation of vanity, I may boast of it. The imputation of pride I am not so anxious to avoid: it more naturally attaches itself to that dignified stability; that high integri---I mean that public virt---I should say--- 
mumbling indistinctly to himself 
which my family has been conspicuous for. 


Sir C. 
Pride is a fault that great men blush not to own---it is the enobled offspring of self-love; tho', it must be confess'd, grave and pompous vanity, like a fat plebeian in a robe of office, does very often assume its name. 


Lord A. 
Ha, ha, Sir Crafty! you have a pleasant imagination: one can see that you sometimes read books. 


Sir C. 
I would rather follow your example, my ? Lord, in the more agreeable study of men. No; I very seldom take a book in my hand, unless it be patronised by some great name, or have the honour, as has been the case with one of our best works lately, to be dedicated to your Lordship. 


   



Lord A. 
I am obliged to you, Supplecoat; I am sure I am very happy if a name of so little importance as mine can be of any use to the learned world. We all owe learning a great deal. 


Sir C. 
I am sure the patronage of your Lordship's name is a full recompense to learning for all the obligations you owe her. 



Lord A. bowing graciously, and then turning to Seabright , as if modestly to interrupt the stream of his own praise. 
Mr. Seabright, I must have a conversation with you in your library, when you can bestow as much leisure upon me. Most of our elections are already decided, and the ensuing parliament bids fair to be as united and as meritorious as its predecessor. In those places where I have the honour to possess some little influence, the constitution, the government, or ministry---that is to say the same thing, you know, will find hearty and zealous supporters: I think I may depend at least on the member for Crockdale. 

???????????????????????????????????????? bowing. 


Sea. 
I hope I shall always be found to merit the friendship and alliance I have the honour of bearing ? to your Lordship. 



Lord A. drawing back coldly. 
Friendship is always the strongest tye, Mr. Seabright: indeed the only one that is now held in any consideration, or indeed ever mention'd. 



Sea. mortified and drawing back also. 
I am ready to attend you, my Lord, whenever you please: I shall have the honour of shewing you the way to my library. 


   



Lord A. 
I am infinitely obliged to you. Will you go with us too, Sir Crafty? You have a list of the voters for Underwall in your pocket. The ladies will excuse us. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Lord All. Sir Crafty , and Sea. who goes out with them and re-enters almost immediately. 



Sea. to Lady S.  
His Lordship sent me back to borrow your spectacles. 


Lady S. 
Spectacles! I use no such thing. 


Sea. 
He says you do. 


Lady S. 
O yes, there is a particular kind which I sometimes look thro' to examine any thing very minutely. 

???????????????????????????????????????? After receiving the spectacles and going to the door, he suddenly stops and turns back. 


Sea. 
But is it your brother's interest that has made Supplecoat a baronet? 


Lady S. 
I dare say it is. 


Sea. 
Yes, yes! I make no doubt of it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit, hurrying away. 



Lady S. to Soph. angrily. 
What made you, ? child, skulk behind backs so, like a simpleton? ---You can be fluent enough when there is no occasion for it, and when you ought to speak you have not a word to say for yourself. This is true nursery breeding. 


Soph. 
Indeed, Madam, you may thank yourself for it; for after what you said to me, before they arrived, about Sir Crafty Supplecoat and marrying, I could not bear to look at him; and every time he look'd at me, I felt strange and mortified, just 

   

as if I had been set there to be look'd at. He is the most disagreeable man I ever saw in my life. 


Lady S. 
Don't be uneasy; you have little chance, I'm afraid, of being molested by him. But I forget, I must write to my friend, Mrs. Cudimore; her husband is in credit now, and I have been too negligent a correspondent. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 



Soph. sighing deeply. 
O dear! O dear! O dear me! she sleeps quietly under the green sod that I would right gladly lie down beside. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit sorrowfully. 

SCENE V. 

A small room with Sophia 's books and music, and flower-pots, &c. set in order. Enter Sophia very sorrowful, leaning upon nurse . 



Soph. 
O my dear nurse! you are our best friend, and so she is going to send you away from us.--- What will become of the poor children now! What will become of us all by-and-bye! And my father too: even my father. Oh how it grieved me to see him courting that proud Lord, who seems ashamed to consider him as his brother-in-law! To see even my father look'd down upon---it goes to my heart. 


Nurse. 
Let him take what he gets, an' a murrain to him! he had no business to bring her here to torment us all, after the dear lady we have lost.--- But dry up your tears: we'll be revenged upon her: there is not a creature in the house that has not swore it: we'll be revenged upon her. 


   



Soph. 
What do you mean, nurse? 


Nurse. 
I must not tell you, my dear young lady; it is not proper that you should know any thing of it: but all the servants are joined in a plot, and they'll damp her courage, I warrant ye; they'll scare her finely. 



Soph. skipping and clapping her hands. 
O I shall be so glad to have her well scared! And I wish they would steal that nasty dog of her's, for she is ? kind to no living creature but it. 


Nurse. 
Nay, to give the devil his due, I believe she is growing fond of little Tony? 


Soph. 
Little Tony? 


Nurse. 
Yes indeed. It is strange enough, but the other day as she pass'd thro' the hall, we were all looking sourly enough upon her no doubt, when, what possess'd the child I don't know, but he held out his arms to her and smiled. 


Suph. 
Nasty little toad! to hold out his arms to her! 


Nurse. 
And, would you believe it, she took him in her arms, kiss'd him very kindly, and has taken to him wonderfully ever since. 


Soph. 
And do you think she really loves him? 


Nurse. 
Upon my honest word I do. 


Soph. 
O then, don't let them do any harm to her! don't let them take any revenge upon her! if she love Tony, I would not have her hurt. 


Nurse. 
O but she loves none of the rest; she is as hard as a millstone to the other two. O la! here comes that fine Sir Crafty, as they call him: I wonder 

   

what can bring him here: can he be coming after you, Miss Sophy? 
with a significant smile. 


Soph. 
Now don't say so, nurse, for you know I ? can't bear it. 

Enter Sir Crafty Supplecoat , advancing to Sophia with a very courteous smiling face, whilst she shrinks back and keeps close to nurse . 




Soph. aside. 
O don't go, nurse! 


Sir C. 
Lady Sarah has had the goodness, Miss Seabright, to send to you a very willing messenger, who is happy to find any pretence in the world to present himself before you. 



Nurse. aside to Soph.  
It is just as I said. 
aloud to Sir C.  
Meaning yourself, Sir? 


Sir C. 
Yes; well guess'd, nurse! you are cunning enough I see; you have the true sagacity about you that becomes your occupation; and I doubt not that your young lady has profited by your very instructive society. Now that you have found out the messenger, perhaps she may guess what his errand is. 

???????????????????????????????????????? with an affected leer. 



Nurse. aside to Sophia , who shrinks back still more. 
Ay, it is very like courting I assure you. 



Sir C. advancing as she recedes. 
Will not Miss Seabright do me the honour to bestow one thought upon it? I cannot doubt of her ability to guess my errand, if she will have the condescension. 



Nurse. aside to Soph.  
Yes, yes! it is the very thing: I have heard many a courtship begin after this fashion. 


   




Soph. to Sir C. very much embarrassed and frightened. 
I---I---I'm sure I don't know. 



Sir C. still advancing towards her as she recedes, with a more intolerable leer on his face. 
Nay, do ? have the goodness to give me this proof of the skill you have acquired in this refined academy of improvement, and tell me on what errand I am come. 



Soph. becoming angry. 
I'm sure I don't know, unless it be to make a fool of me, and I don't think I need to stay any longer for that purpose. 
runs out. 



Nurse. running after her. 
Don't run away, Miss Sophy! he is a good looking gentleman, and very civil spoken too. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 



Sir C. looking after them: 
Ha, ha, ha! 

Enter Sharp at the side by which they have gone out. 



Sharp. 
You are merry, Sir: I believe I can guess what amuses you. 


Sir C. 
I dare say thou canst, Sharp; it is easy enough to see what they have got into their foolish heads. Ha, ha, ha! does the political Lady Sarah think to put off her troublesome nursery girl upon Crafty Supplecoat. But let me encourage the mistake for a little, it will strengthen my interest with Lord Allcrest, which at present is necessary to me. Thou understand'st me, Sharp. 


Sharp. 
Yes, yes, Sir; and you will have little trouble in keeping it up, for the servants, thanks to Mrs. Pry's gossiping, who is in her lady's secrets, have got it so strongly into their heads, that if you but pick up the young lady's glove when she 

   

? drops it, they think you are putting a ring on her finger. 


Sir C. 
I thank thee Sharp; and if thou cans't at any time pick up, in thine own way, any information that may be useful to me, thou shalt not go without thy reward. And how does the young lady like her step-mother's scheme? hast thou heard them talk about that? 


Sharp. 
Nay, they say she dislikes it very much, and is deucedly shy about it. 



Sir C. smiling conceitedly. 
Poo, poo, poo! She must be allowed to have her little management as well as older people: deceit is inherent in the human mind. I came here at Lady Sarah's desire to request that she would bring her music book into the drawing room, and play to us; and she took it into her head---but what brought you here to seek me? Is the horse-dealer come to look at my ponies? 


Sharp. 
Yes, Sir. 


Sir C. 
Then I must go to him. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Sir Crafty , whilst Sharp remains behind, musing, as if in serious thought about something. 
Enter Robert in a great rage. 



Rob. 
Ay! what damn'd tricks are you thinking of? I have overheard, at the door here, all that you and your vile master have been saying. My young lady to be made fool of for his conveniency, indeed! ? She's a match for a better man than him any day in the year; there is not a lord of the land too 

   

good for her. But I'll be revenged upon him, vile serpent that he is! I'll be revenged upon him! 


Sharp. 
Well, don't be so loud, my good Robert, and you will perhaps be satisfied. He has twice promised to get me a place or to raise my wages for me, and if he break his word with me a third time,---I know what. Come man, let us go and have a glass together. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 
END OF THE SECOND ACT.


   


ACT III. 

SCENE I. 

A small country inn near Seabright 's house. Enter Beaumont, Morgan , and William Beaumont . 




Bea. to Mor. 
Well, my good Sir, how do you like travelling once more a little easy forenoon's journey in your native country? 


Mor. 
Every thing in my native country is pleasant to me, or at least ought to be so: but I don't know; I return to it again like a dog to a deserted house; he begins to wag his tail at the threshold, but there is no body to welcome him in: there is another generation grown up that knows not me; there is nothing but young people now in the world. 


Bea. 
But those young people will love and esteem you, and honour you. The caresses even of cheerful infancy go very kindly to an old man's heart. Come, come! you shall see the promising family your niece has left behind her, and your heart will warm to them. Seabright has, I fear, set an ungracious step-mother over their head; but she, perhaps, looks more so than she is.---Here comes our landlady. 

   

Enter Landlady . 

Good morning, Mrs. Thrifty. 



Land. to Bea.  
O Sir! I be glad to see you! 


Bea. 
I thank you good landlady: take good care of my wife. 


Land. 
? That I will, Sir; she's in the green chamber, giving orders to her maid. And this young gentleman is your son, I suppose. 

???????????????????????????????????????? turning, and courtesying to Wil.  


Bea. 
Yes, my good ma'am. 


Land. 
Blessings on him! Ay! if he be like his father, the blessings of the widow and the helpless will rest upon him.---You are going to the Squire's I suppose? 


Bea. 
Yes, landlady; how does the family do? 


Land. 
O lud, Sir! what an alter'd family it be! the servants a-grumbling; the lady a-scolding; the Squire himself going up and down like a man possess'd, as they tell me, and can't sleep in his bed o' nights for writing to dukes and lords and such like, and tormenting himself, poor man, just to be made a Sir or a Knight, or some nonsense or other of that kind:---and then all the poor children; it grives me to see them like so many chickens that have got no dam to gather them together, tho' I'm sure that dear good young lady does all that she can for them: I sees her every morning from the room overhead, which overlooks their garden, walking with them as if she were the mother of them all, tho' I warrant you she's soon snubb'd into the house again: O it grieves me to see them! 


   




Will. eagerly. 
? In the room overhead did you say? and in the morning? about this time? 


Land. 
I don't know if just at this very time. 


Will. 
I dare she is. 

???????????????????????????????????????? going out eagerly. 


Bea. 
But you wanted to read that paragraph about your friend, William, and here is the newspaper just come. 



Will. impatiently. 
O hang it! not now: I don't care if I never read it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit quickly. 



Bea. to Land.  
And he can't sleep in his bed, they say, for writing letters to great people? 


Land. 
Yes Sir, so they say; but there may be other reasons for a man not resting in his bed. 


Bea. 
And what other reasons may there be? 


Land, 
Sir, my grandfather was sexton of the parish, and would have thought nothing of digging you a grave in a dark winter evening, or ringing the church bell in the middle of the night, with never a living creature near him but his dog and his lantern, and I have myself sat up with dead corpses ere now, and I can't but say they always lay very quietly when I was with them; therefore I'm not a very likely person, you know, to give heed to foolish stories about ghosts and such like. Howsomever, the servants say that they hear strange ? noises since their new lady came home; and some of them swears that they have heard their late lady's footsteps walking along the hall in the middle of the night, as plainly as when she was alive. 


Bea. 
That is strange enough, landlady, 


   



Land. 
To be sure it is, Sir, but what shall we say against it; for if miser's come back to the world again to look after their gold, why may not a mother come back to it again to look after her children, oppress'd by a hard hearted step-mother? 


Bea. 
Indeed, it would be difficult in this case to gainsay it. But let us have coffee in the next room, I pray you, as soon as you can. 


Land. 
Immediately, Sir. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Landlady . 


Bea. 
This is a strange untoward account that our good landlady gives us of the family. One can find out, however, that domestic comfort is no more the lot of poor Seabright---but we shall see when we go to him what state he is in. 


Mor. 
You will see yourself then, for I shan't go to him at all. 


Bea. 
No! don't say so, my good friend: he was an affectionate husband to your niece, and an indulgent father to her children: 
 Mor. shakes his head. 
When his wife died, his old habits were ? broken up; he is of an aspiring disposition; a high alliance and a borough presented themselves to him, and he fell into the snare. 
 Mor. still shakes his head. 
He has married a woman who is narrow minded naturally; but that disposition has been strengthened by circumstances: she has long been left, as a single woman, to support high rank upon a very small income, and has lived much with those to whom begging and solicitations are no disgrace: differently circumstanced she might have been 

   

more respectable, and when differently circumstanced she may become so. 


Mor. 
Go to him thyself, Beaumont: I am an old man; my life's bark has been long buffeted about on a stormy sea, and I have seen cruel sights. I do not look upon my fellow-men with the same gentle eye as thou dost: I cannot love them myself, but I love thee because thou dost it: so e'en take me home to thine own house; no other house will I enter; and let me have an arm chair by thy fire-side to end my days in, where I may sit at my ease and grumble at the whole human race. 


Bea. 
No, no! you shall see all your relations; and love them too, and do what is right by every ? one of them. 


Mor. 
Do it for me then: I can't be troubled with it. Take my fortune into your own hands, and dispose of it as you please. 


Bea. 
No; you shall do it yourself; and the blessings of those you bestow it upon shall fall on your own head undivided and unintercepted. 


Mor. 
I will take the simplest and shortest way of settling my fortune; I will give it all to your son. 



Bea. stretching himself up with a proud smile. 
Yes, if he will have it. 

Enter William B. with great animation. 



Will. 
I've seen her father! I've seen her! 


Bea. 
Who have you seen? 


   



Will. 
My cousin Sophy: She is in the garden just now with all the children about her; and they have pulled off her hat in their play, and she looks so pretty---I---I mean good humour'd, and--- 



Bea. smiling. 
There is no harm in calling her pretty, William.---But Mr. Morgan has got something very serious to say to you: he wishes to settle his fortune upon you. 


Wil. 
His whole fortune upon me! 


Mor. 
Yes, my brave William, every shilling of it. 


Will. 
What! and Sophia and all the little Sea-brights, ? who are as nearly related to you, to have nothing? 


Mor. 
It shall be all your own. 



Will. with great vehemence. 
Hang me then if I take one sixpence more than my own share! 


Mor. 
Ah! I see how it is: I am a blasted tree from which no sapling shoots: my grey hairs are despised. 


Will. 
O say not so, my good Sir! 
bending one knee to the ground, and kissing the old man's hand. 
I will bow my head as affectionately beneath your blessing as the most dutiful child. But you shall have many children to respect and love you! and one of them---O you shall see one of them that will make your heart leap with pleasure! 

???????????????????????????????????????? hurrying away. 


Bea. 
Where are you going in such haste? 


Will. 
Never mind; I'll soon return. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 


   




Mor. to Bea. who looks significantly to him. 
Yes, my friend, he was sent to you from him who has given you many blessings. 


Bea. 
But none like this. 
fervently. 
He is a brave and upright spirit, passing with me thro' this world to a better. When he was but so high, yea but so high, how his little heart would spurn at all injustice! 

Enter Mrs. Beaumont . 



Mrs. B. 
Where is William? 


Bea. 
? He is gone over the way I believe to fetch Sophia here. 


Mrs. B. 
I'm glad of that: I came here only to see her, and I will never enter Seabright's door again, as long as I live. 


Bea. 
"As long as I live," my dear, is a phrase of very varied significations: it means the term of an angry woman's passion, or a fond woman's fancy, or a--- 


Mrs. B. 
Or a good man's simplicity, Mr. Beaumont. Do you think I will ever enter the house where that woman is the mistress; unfeeling, undelicate, uncivil? 


Bea. 
But she won't squander his fortune, however, and that is a good thing for the children. 


Mrs. B. 
Poo, Mr. Beaumont! the wickedest creature on earth has always your good word for some precious quality or other. 


Beo. 
Well, my dear, and the wickedest creature in the world always has something about it, that shews whose creature it is---that shews we were all 

   

meant for a good end; and that there is a seed---a springing place---a beginning for it in every body. 


Mrs. B. 
It is a very small speck with her, then, I'm sure, and would elude any body's search but ? your own. 


Bea. 
Now, Mr. Morgan, don't think hardly of my wife's disposition because she is angry at present: I assure you she is a very good woman, and has an excellent heart: She is in all things better than myself, tho' I'm of a more composed disposition. 



Mrs. B. softened. 
My dear Beaumont! I chide you as a child, and I honour you as a man! But no more of this.---Does William tell Sophia that she is to meet her great uncle here? 


Mor. 
I hope he will not: I should wish to be unknown for some time, that I may observe and determine for myself, since you will make me act for myself. 


Bea. 
Go then into the next room with Mrs. Beaumont: I'll wait for them here, and if he has not told her already, I'll desire him to conceal it. I hear them coming, 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Mrs. B. and Morgan . 
Enter William B. leading in Sophia . 



Soph. 
But who are you taking me to see? 


Will. 
You shall know by-and-bye.---But do stop a moment, Sophy, and pull back the hat a little from your face; you look best with it so. 
stopping and putting her hat to rights. 
That will do.--- And throw away that foolish basket out of your hands 
taking a flower basket from her, in which she 

   

seems to have been gathering rose leaves, and throwing it away. 
? and pray now hold up your head a little better. 


Soph. 
But what is all this preparation for? 

????????????????????????????????????????  Bea. who had retired to the bottom of the stage, unobserved by them, now advances softly behind Soph. and makes a sign to William to be silent. 


Wil. 
You are to see somebody that loves you very much, and likes to see you look well, you know; you are to see your aunt. 


Soph. 
But there is somebody else you told me of. 


Wil. 
Yes, there is an old connexion of ours with her; and pray now, Sophy, look pleasantly upon him; for he is an old man, and has met with misfortunes; he has been in foreign countries; he has been in prisons, and has had chains on his legs. 


Soph. 
O then, I am sure I shall look upon him kindly! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Soph. and Wil. followed at a distance by Beaumont . 

SCENE II. 

A large room in Seabright 's house. Lady Sarah is discovered sitting by a table writing, near the bottom of the stage. 



Lady S. 
There is so much light thrown across my paper here, it makes me almost blind. Who's there? is it you, Pry? 

Enter Pry from the adjoining room. 



Pry. 
Yes, my Lady; I sits in this room here pretty often, for the servants are vulgar and rude 

   

to me, and my own room is so lonesome I can't bear to be in it. Not that I hear any of them noises, excepting in the night time; yet I can't help thinking of it all day long when I am alone.---First it comes to my door, "lowe, lowe, lowe!" just like a great bull: then it comes presently after, "scrie, scrie, scrie!" just like a raven, or a cock, or a cat, or any of those wild animals; and then for the groans that it gives---O! an old jack that has not been oil'd for a twelve-month is a joke to it. 



Lady S. gravely. 
Remove this table for me to the other end of the room; it is too much in the sun here. 
 Pry removes the table near the front of the stage, and Lady S. sits down to write again, without speaking; then looking up and seeing Pry still by her. 
Leave me. 


Pry. 
I'm just going, my Lady. I believe I told you, my Lady, that Robert tells me, the vicar always expects the present of a new gown and cassock, when he is sent for to lay a ghost in any genteel house. 


Lady S. 
? Leave me, I say; I'll hear no more of that nonsense at present. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Pry , and enter Seabright . 


Sea. 
What has that absurd creature been chattering about? 


Lady S. 
Still about those strange noises. 


Sea. 
I thought so; every noise is a thief or a ghost with her. Who are you writing to? 


Lady S. 
I am writing to Lady Puler, to beg she will have the goodness to send me a few lines by 

   

return of post, to let me know how her rheumatism does: her husband, you know, may have it in his power to serve you. 



Sea. nodding. 
That is very right, my dear. 


Lady S. 
And here is a letter I have just written to Lady Mary Markly: she is a spiteful toad, and I never could endure her; but she is going to be married for the third time to a near relation of the minister's, and it will be proper in me, you know, to be very much interested in her approaching happiness. 


Sea. 
Yes, perfectly right, my dear Lady Sarah; I won't interrupt you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? sits down. 


Lady S. 
Indeed, my dear Seabright, I have been in the habit of studying these things, and I know how to make my account in it. If people would but attend to it, every acquaintance that they ? make, every letter that they write, every dinner that they give, might be made to turn to some advantage. 



Sea. hastily, with marks of disgust. 
No, no! that is carrying it too far! 


Lady S. 
Not at all, Mr. Seabright! I sent a basket of the best fruit in your garden this morning even to old Mrs. Pewterer, the Mayor of Crockdale's mother-in-law, and I dare say it won't be thrown away. 



Sea. smiling. 
Well, that, however, was very well thought of. But I interrupt you. 
she continues to write, and he sits musing for some time, then speaking to himself. 
A baronet of Great Britain and 

   

seven thousand a year! 
smiling to himself. 
Ay, that would be a resting place at which I could put up my horses and say, I have done enough. A baronet of Great Britain, and seven thousand a year! 



Lady S. looking up from her paper. 
A baronet of Great Britain you will soon be; this day's post, I trust, will inform you of that honour being conferred upon you; but the seven thousand a year, I wish we were as sure of having that added to it. 


Sea. 
I wish we were; but Mr. Plausible has been with me last night, and has pointed out a way to me, in which, by venturing a considerable capital ? on very small risk, a most prodigious gain might be made; and in which, money laid out--- 



Lady S. interrupting him eagerly. 
Will never return any more! 
getting up alarmed. 
Pray, pray, my dear Seabright, don't frighten me! The very idea of such a scheme will throw me into a fit.--- Don't let that man enter the house any more---he is a dark-eyed, needy-looking man---don't let him come here any more. 


Sea. 
Why what alarms you so much? he is a very uncommon man, and a man of genius. 


Lady S. 
Keep him out of the house then, for heaven's sake! there is never any good got by admitting men of genius; and you may keep them all out of your house, I'm sure, without being very inhospitable. 


Sea. 
Your over-caution will be a clog upon my fortune 


   



Lady S. 
A clog upon your fortune, Mr. Seabright! Am not I doing every thing that a woman can do to advance it? am not I writing letters for you? making intimacies for you? paying visits for you? teazing every body that is related to me within the fiftieth degree of consanguinity for you?---and is this being a clog upon your fortune? 


Sea. 
? Well, well! we shall see what it all comes to. 


Lady S. 
Yes, we shall see; this very post will inform you of our success; I'm sure of it; and see, here are the letters. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Pry with letters, which she gives to Sea. ; and then puts one down on the table for Lady Sarah , who is so busy looking at Seabright 's that she does not perceive it. 



Lady S. to Pry , who seems inclined to stay. 
Don't wait; I shall call when I want you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Pry. 



Sea. opening a letter and running his eye over it eagerly. 
Hang it! it is about the altering of a turnpike road. 
throws it away impatiently, and opens another letter which he reads in like manner. 
Stuff and nonsense about friendship, and old acquaintance, and so on! What a parcel of fools there are in the world! Ha! what seal is this? 
opening another letter eagerly. 
Hell and the devil! it is a letter from your brother, and only a common place letter of compliment, with never a word on the subject! 
Tearing the letters in a rage, and strewing them upon the floor. 
Cursed be pen, ink, and paper, and every one that puts his trust in them! 


   



Lady S. 
Don't destroy the blank sides of your letters, Mr. Seabright, they will do to write notes upon. 


Sea. 
O confound your little minute economy, Lady Sarah! it comes across me every now and then like the creeping of a spider: it makes me mad. 



Lady S. putting aside her papers, much offended. 
? I think I need scarcely give myself the trouble of writing any more to-day. 
seeing the letter on her table. 
Ha! a letter from my brother to me! 
opening it. 
and a later date I fancy than that which you have received. 

???????????????????????????????????????? reads it with her countenance brightening up. 



Sea. looking eagerly at her. 
What's in it? 
she is silent. 
What's in it? for God's sake tell me! 



Lady S. going up to him with a smiling face, and an affected formal courtesy. 
I have the honour to congratulate Sir Anthony Seabright. 


Sea. 
Is it really so? Is it really so? Let me see, let me see. 
snatches the letter from her and reads it. 
O it is so in very truth!---Give me your hand, my dear Lady Sarah! and give me a kiss too. 
kisses her on one cheek, and she graciously turns to him the other. 
O one will do very well.---Where are all the children? let every soul in the house come about me!---No, no, no! let me be decent; let me be moderate. 

Enter Plausible . 




Sea. going up joyfully to him. 
How do you do? how do you do, my very good friend? 


   




Lady S. pulling Sea. by the sleeve. 
You know you are engaged; you can't speak with any body at present. 


Sea. 
I can do all I have to do very well, and give a quarter of an hour to Mr. Plausible, notwithstanding. 



Lady S. still pulling him. 
You have many letters ? to write, and many other things.---You understand me? 


Plau. 
I shall have the pleasure of calling then to-morrow morning. 


Lady S. 
He is engaged to-morrow morning. 


Plau. 
And in the evening also? 


Lady S. 
Yes, Sir, and every hour in the day.--- He has not yet laid out his fortune to such advantage as will enable him to bestow quite so much leisure time upon his friends as Mr. Plausible. 


Plau. 
I can never regret the leisure time I have upon my hands, since it has given me an opportunity of obliging your Ladyship: I have procured the inestimable receipt for whitening linen without soap that I mention'd to you, and I shall bring it to you to-morrow. 


Lady S. 
Pray don't take the trouble! I am much obliged to you: but we are all so much occupied! 
to Sea.  
Are not you going to write by return of post? 



Sea. to Plau.  
I am really much engaged at present: the King has been graciously pleased, tho' most unworthy of it, and most unlook'd for on my part, to honour me with the dignity of a baronet of Great Britain. 


   



Plau. 
? I rejoice, my dear Sir, I congratulate you with all my heart; and I have the honour to congratulate your Ladyship also. 


Lady S. 
I thank you, Sir---good morning---good morning. 



Sea. to Plau.  
Trifling as these things may be, yet as a mark of royal favour--- 



Lady S. impatiently. 
Yes, yes; he knows all that well enough.---Good morning. 
to Plau.  
You will positively have no time to write your letters by the return of post. 
to Sea. pulling him away, who bows to Plau. and goes with her unwillingly. Turning round suddenly to Plau. as they are just going out. 
Whitening linen without soap? 


Plau. 
Yes, Madam; and no expence of any kind in the business. 


Lady S. 
When you are passing this way, at any rate, I should be glad to look at it. 


Plau. 
I shall have the honour very soon of calling upon your Ladyship. 


Lady S. 
You are very obliging. You will excuse us; you will excuse us, Mr. Plausible; we are really obliged to be extremely rude to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Lady S. and Sea.  



Plau. alone. 
Ha, ha, ha! I shall keep hold still I find. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Prowler , looking cautiously about as he enters. 
What do you want? 


Pro. 
Unless you want to be laid up by the heels, ? don't go out of this house by the same door that 

   

you enter'd it. I have waited in the passage here to tell you. 


Plau. 
Ha! have they found me out? 


Pro. 
Yes, by my faith, there are two as ugly looking fellows waiting for you at the front entry as ever made a poor debtor's heart quake. There is surely some back door in this house. 
Enter Robert . 


to Rob.  
My good friend, I want to know where we can find a back way out of this house. 


Rob. 
And I want to know when I am to have the crown I intrusted to you. 


Pro. 
To me, Sir? 


Rob. 
Yes, to you, Sir; and you know it very well, you do. 


Pro. 
O! you are my friend Robert, that I was enquiring after. 


Rob. 
Yes, Sir; and I will have my money directly; for I know you are a cheat; I know it by your very face. 


Pro. 
Ha, ha, ha! So you prefer having a crown to-day to receiving ten guineas to-morrow. 


Rob. 
Receiving ten fiddle-strings to-morrow! pay me my crown directly. 


Pro. 
Very well, with all my heart; but you must ? sign me a paper, in the first place, giving up all right to the ten guineas you are entitled to. 
 Robert hesitates. 
Nay, nay, I'm not such an ass as you take me for: there is pen, ink, and paper; 
pointing to the table. 
Sign me a right to the ten guineas directly. 


   




Rob. scratching his head. 
Well, we'll let it stand if you please till another time. 


Pro. 
I thought so: faith you're too cunning for me! But shew us the way to the back door, quickly. 


Rob. 
And should you like to come that way tomorrow, when you bring me the money? I shall be sure to be in the way to let you in. 


Pro. 
Let us out by the back door to-day, and let me in to-morrow by any door you please. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 
END OF THE THIRD ACT.


   


ACT IV. 

SCENE I. 

Seabright 's library. Enter Seabright , as if from a short journey, and the Eldest Boy running after him. 



Boy. 
O papa, papa! I'm glad you're come back again! And have you said over your speech to the Parliament? and did they say any fine speeches back again to you? 


Sea. 
Go away, George: I'm fatigued; I can't speak to you now. 

Enter Robert . 



Rob. 
Won't your honour have some refreshment after your journey? My Lady is gone out an airing; you had better have something. 


Sea. 
No, nothing, Robert.---A glass of water, if you please. 

???????????????????????????????????????? sits down grave and dispirited, whilst Robert fetches the water, and the Boy plays about the room. 



Rob. presenting the water. 
I'll warrant now that you have had a power of fine talking in this Parliament house; and I warrant your honour's speech was as well regarded as any of it. 


Sea. 
I thank you, Robert: I am fatigued, and would be alone for a little: take that boy away in 

   

your hand. 
Exeunt Rob. and the Boy , and Sea . remains sometime musing with a dissatisfied face; then speaking to himself. 
"The conciseness with which the Honourable Baronet who spoke last has treated this question." Ah! but I was,---I was too concise! The whole train of connecting and illustrative thoughts, which I had been at so much pains, before hand, to fix and arrange in my head, vanish'd ? from me as I rose to speak; and nothing of all that I had prepared presented itself before me, but the mere heads of the subject, standing up barren and bare, like so many detach'd rocks in a desert land. 
starting up. 
This will never do! I'm sure I have not spared myself: I have labour'd night and day at this speech: I have work'd at it like a slave in a mine; and yet, when I came to the push, it deceived me. 
shaking his head. 
This will never do! let me rest satisfied with what I have got, and think of being a speaker no more. 
stands despondingly for a little while, with his arms across, then suddenly becoming animated. 
No! I will not give it up! I saw an old school-fellow of mine in the lobby, as I went out, who whisper'd to the person standing next him as I pass'd, that I was his townsman. Does not this look as if my speech, even such as I was enabled to give it, had been approved of? O, I will not give it up! This is the only way to high distinction: I must drudge and labour still. Heigh ho! 
yawning grievously. A gentle tap is heard at the door. 
Who's there? 
angrily. 



Soph. without. 
May I come in, papa? 


   



Sea. 
Yes, yes; but what do you want? 

Enter Sophia , timidly. 



Soph. 
I only come, my dear Sir, to see how you do after your journey. But you don't look well, ? papa: you don't look happy: has any thing distress'd you? 


Sea. 
No, my good girl. 



Soph. kissing his hand. 
I thank you, papa, for calling me your good girl: I was your good girl. 


Sea. 
And are so still, my dear Sophia; but you must sometimes excuse me; I am not very happy. 


Soph. 
Ah papa! I know what makes you unhappy. 



Sea. shaking his head. 
Thou dost not! thou dost not! 


Soph. 
Ah but I do! and nobody told it me neither ---I can just see it my ownself. You are giving yourself a great deal of trouble, and courting very proud and very disagreeable people, for what you very probably won't get; and you are grieved to think that Lady Sarah does not treat us so kindly as she might do. But don't be unhappy: don't court those proud people any more: you have enough to live upon as you used to do; and Lady Sarah will be kinder to us by-and-bye. I know she will; for she loves little Tony already; and if she should not we will never complain. 



Sea. kissing her. 
My sweet child! thou deservest ---O thou deservest more than I can ever do for thee! 


   




Soph. gladly. 
? Do you say so, indeed? O then do this for me! 


Sea. 
What is it, Sophia? 


Soph. 
Trouble yourself no more with great people, and studying of speeches for that odious Parliament; and when Lady Sarah is out of the way, let the children come and play about you again, as they used to do. 



Sea. tenderly. 
I thank you, my good child, but you don't understand these things. 
Walks thoughtfully across the room, and then returns to her again. 
There is an office which Lord Allcrest has promised to procure for me, that would bring me a considerable and permanent addition to my income; if I once had that secured, I believe, in truth, it would be no unwise thing in me to follow your advice. 


Soph. 
O, my dear Sir, I hope you will have it then! 
skipping joyfully. 
I hope you will have it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter a Servant , and announces Sir Crafty Supplecoat . 


Sea. 
Sir Crafty here! can any thing have happen'd for me? 


Soph. 
O if it should be the place!---But shall I go away? for I don't like to see that man. 


Sea. 
No, my dear, stay with me; I like to have you beside me. 


Soph. 
Then I will stay; for I am happy now, and I can look upon him boldly. 

Enter Sir Crafty Supplecoat . 



Sea. 
? Sir Crafty, your servant; I'm very happy to see you. 


   



Sir C. 
Your servant, Sir Anthony; I'm happy in being able to pay you my respects.---Miss Seabright I hope is well. 
bowing to Soph. who returns his civility with chearfulness. 
Indeed, Sir Anthony, I have long'd ever since I heard your speech in the House, which, for a maiden speech---Well, I will not say what it was.---I have long'd to declare to you the extreme pleasure I take in the fair career that is now open'd before you, and in being permitted to consider myself as one of your friends. 


Sea. 
You do me great honour: I am infinitely obliged to you. My speech indeed ought---it ought to have--- 

???????????????????????????????????????? hesitating. 


Sir C. 
To have been just what it was, my dear Baronet. Your friends enjoy'd it; and, let me say it freely, without envy. 


Sea. 
I am much flatter'd: their praises are--- are--- 

???????????????????????????????????????? hesitating. 


Sir C. 
Are proportion'd to their admiration, Sir Anthony; and they have great pleasure in talking of it. 



Sea. eagerly. 
Ha! do they talk much of it? 


Sir C. 
Yes; more than I would venture to repeat ? to you. 


Sea. 
Friends, indeed, say many things that ought not to be believed. 


Sir C. 
I assure you, your's say many things which one of the qualities you so eminently possess would not, perhaps, suffer you to believe. Eloquence ---eloquence, my dear Sir---great things are to be attain'd in this country by eloquence. Eloquence 

   

and high connexions give a man such velocity in moving, that nothing can stop his career.--- But I ought to tell you, by-the-bye, that old Saunter is dead, unexpectedly; and that office, if it indeed can be consider'd as any object to you now, is ready for-your acceptance. 



Soph. aside to Sea.  
Is that the office, papa? 


Sea. 
Yes, child; hold your tongue. 
aloud. 
I am obliged to you for this intelligence, Sir Crafty: an office for life, tho' not very considerable, is of some consequence to a man who has a family of children. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Soph. takes her father's hand and presses it gratefully. 


Sir C. 
Ha, ha, ha! Sir Anthony Seabright, with all his abilities and connexions, is, like a very good father, anxious to provide for his family! I thought, my dear Sir, such talents as your's had generally been accompanied with an aspiring temper; but ? Lady Sarah's prudent character, I perceive, has had its effect upon you. 


Sea. 
No, no; you are wrong. 


Sir C. 
Nay, pardon me if I say that you also are wrong, in fixing yourself down, in the very beginning of your career, as a quiet unaspiring man, who is glad to be early provided for in a quiet, humble permanency: for this office, you know, is regarded as--- 



Sea. interrupting him eagerly. 
What, is it regarded in that light? 


Sir C. 
It really is. Mr. Trotman, now promoted to a peerage, and whose first speech, by-the-bye 

   

very much resembled your own, refused it on that very account; and Mr. Brown, and Mr. Wilson, and Sir Samuel Soppet, and many other Misters and Sirs, promoted to the same dignity, would never have got on, be assured, if they had thus fixed themselves down at the very threshold of advancement. 


Sea. 
But I see no reason why accepting such an office as this, should hinder one from advancing. 


Sir C. 
I can give you no good reason for it, I confess; but there have been certain places, time out of mind, which have, some how or other, been consider'd as indicative or otherwise of promotion, ? and which stand up in the great field of honours like finger posts in a wide track'd common, saying "this is the way to such a place:" they who are once certain of those places, move on to the others, for no earthly reason, that we can perceive, but because they have been placed in the first; and this you will readily allow is no time for innovation. 


Sea. 
I believe there is something in what you say. 


Sir. C. 
There is so much in it, that if you can find some less aspiring friend, to whom you can with confidence give up this office, relying on his honour to assist you with the full weight of his interest on all future occasions, I am sure you will never think of accepting it. 



Soph. laying hold of her father's arm, and speaking eagerly to Sir Crafty  
Ah, but he will tho'! 


   



Sea. 
Sophia, you forget yourself. 

???????????????????????????????????????? she shrinks back abash'd. 



Sir C. smiling. 
It is an amiable weakness in this interested age to forget yourself, and confined, I believe, to young ladies alone. 



Soph. provoked and roused. 
I believe, at least, political baronets, tho' not very old, do but seldom fall into it. 
archly. 
And I know, papa, who this friend is that will so kindly take this office off your hands. Sir Crafty will name him to you by-and-bye: ? it is a man who does not forget himself. 



Sea. displeased. 
What is the meaning of this, Sophia? I never saw you thus petulant before: I beg of you to retire; Sir Crafty and I must not be interrupted. 


Soph. 
I will retire, my dear Sir---but oh! 
taking her father's hand and pressing it. 
but oh!---you know what I would say to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit, casting a significant look to Seabright as she goes out. 



Sea. after a considerable pause. 
Sir Crafty, there is much in what you say, and I believe you are perfectly disinterested in the advice you give me; but I don't know that I could justify myself to my own mind in refusing this office. 


Sir C. 
There are few men less interested than myself; I will say it, Sir Anthony; I will say it proudly.---Pardon me, however, I do not presume to advise you; but hearing Lord Clacker, and the Marquis of Lackland, and some others, talking of your speech, and the usual race of such abilities, and so forth, many suggestions arose in my mind, 

   

in regard to you, my dear Sir, which I very naturally supposed just now might have presented themselves to your own. 


Sea. 
Ha! did Lord Clacker and the Marquis of Lackland talk of my speech, and my abili---I ? mean the probable effects of my situation and connexions? 


Sir C. 
I assure you they spoke of both in a way very gratifying for a friend, so much interested in your promotion as I am, to hear---but remember, I give you no advice: I am a young man, and apt, perhaps, to be too sanguine where the admiration of talents may mislead me: I am too presumptuous to mention my opinion at all. 



Sea. taking his hand with warmth. 
O no! I like you the better for it! to be warmly sanguine is characteristic and graceful in youth; and perhaps this propensity does not more often mislead it than the timorous caution of age.---You mention'd a friend to whom I might resign my pretensions to this office? 


Sir C. 
I did, Sir Anthony; but I now feel an embarrassment.---I'm sure it would never have enter'd into my imagination to think of it. But will you be kind enough to take a turn with me in the garden? there are some things that must be explain'd to you at length, lest you should at all misconceive what I am going to propose to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE II. 

The servants' hall; and Robert discovered pulling some clothes out of a bag, and laughing to himself as he looks at them. Enter cookmaid . 



Cook. 
Are you here, Robert? 


Rob. 
Yes, beef-drippings; what do you want? 


Cook. 
It is ghost-time, don't you know? and your night for it too. 


Rob. 
Indeed! 


Cook. 
Ay, indeed! I groan'd last night, and Gardener the night before; so e'en take your own turn when it comes to you: you was the first contriver of the plot. 


Rob. 
Why don't you see me preparing, hussy? I'm going to dress myself up this very night for the grand contasterfy, as a learned person would call it. 



Cook. clapping her hands. 
O griskins and gravy, but that be delightful! Are you to appear to her to-night? 


Rob. 
Yes, wench; for my master is in town, and is not expected back before to-morrow. 
Holding out the clothes. 
How do you like this black robe? Has it not a smack of the devil in it? 


Cook. 
Black! I thought you were to have been all in white, like my late lady, and to have threaten'd her for being so unkind to the children. 


Rob. 
So I intended, Deborah; but I don't know ? how, a qualm came across my heart, and would 

   

not let me make a mockery and a semblance of my dear mistress; so we'll just make the devil do, my fat Deborah; he'll serve our turn well enough. 


Cook. 
Yes; he serves many a turn, if all that is said of him be true. 


Rob. 
How do you like that black hood with the horns to it? it is all my own contrivance. 


Cook. 
O it will do hugeously! 


Rob. 
And pray mix a little sooty grease for my face, cooky; and let me have some brick-dust to make a red staring ring round my eyes. 


Cook. 
That I will in a trice! But where is your tail, master devil? Will the jack-chain be of any use to you? 


Rob. 
No, no! let her once have a good look of my horns and my red staring eyes, and I warrant you she'll never miss my tail. 


Cook. 
Good success to you! 


Rob. 
I don't doubt of success; for my lady has lived a great part of her life in an old castle in the North, and has as good a notion of a ghost or a goblin as most folks. 


Cook. 
He, he, he! Some folks will be warm enough to-night without frying cutlets. And bless ? you, man! if Mrs. Pry should come in your way, give her a claw for my sake. 


Rob. 
O never doubt that, hussy!---And here, in good time, comes Sharp to settle his part of the business; for you know we are to give his master a claw too, as well as Mrs. Pry. 


   

Enter Sharp . 



Cook. 
Come away, Sharp; which of us all is to visit your master's chamber to night in the shape of the lady that he jilted, as you told us of, because her rich uncle chose to marry whilst their wedding clothes were a-making, and who took it so much to heart, poor thing! that she died soon after of the small-pox? I should not much care to do it myself. 


Sharp. 
No, cooky, we have a better plan than that! 


Cook. 
What is it, man? 


Sharp. 
Tho' he laughs at Miss Seabright as a girl from the nursery, he has taken a strong desire to know whether she likes him or not; and, above all, what fortune she is to have: now I have promised to set Pry a talking to her lady about this, when she puts her to bed to-night, and to place him snugly in the adjoining chamber where he may hear every word that they say. 


Rob. 
? You have told him there is no danger of being discover'd, as that room is always kept lock'd, and that you have stolen the key of it? 


Sharp. 
You may be sure of that. 


Rob. 
Then you may be sure the devil won't fail to take that chamber on his way from Lady Sarah's, and pay his respects to him in passing. Come, come! let us all set about it! I'll dress in my own garret. Take some of those things in your hand. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Giving cook some of the clothes to carry, and taking the rest himself. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE III. 

Lady Sarah 's bed-room, almost dark, with a feeble light thrown across the floor, as from a bad fire. Enter Sir Crafty Supplecoat and Sharp , stealing softly on their tiptoes. 



Sir C. 
Hist, hist! which is the door, Sharp? 


Sharp. 
Never fear, Sir; come this way. 
opening the door of an adjoining room. 
Go in, Sir, and fear nothing. But you must sit in the dark, and not be impatient: Pry wont fail to pump her lady, and you'll hear every word that is said. 

???????????????????????????????????????? putting Sir Crafty into the room, and pretending to lock the door upon him, then exit laughing to himself as he goes out. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Lady Sarah , and Pry carrying lights, by the same door by which Sharp went out, allowing him time to get out of the way without meeting him. 



Pry. setting down the lights. 
Well, I wish this night were well over, for I had such strange dreams last night. 


Lady S. 
Don't trouble me with your dreams now. Have you put all my muslin things into the press, and screw'd them well down? When the creases are taken out of them, they will do perfectly well to wear another day. 


Pry. 
To be sure, my Lady; but for that old petticoat, if I do but touch it, it comes to pieces; it grieves me to see your Ladyship dragging it about 

   

like a cobweb that the flies have been thro'; it would tear up into such pretty handkerchiefs! 


Lady S. 
Will it? as large as those I commonly wear? 


Pry. 
O no! I don't mean such handkerchiefs as you would wear, my Lady, but just--- 


Lady S. 
Don't tease me now.---Have you heard ? any of those noises to-night? 

???????????????????????????????????????? seating herself in a chair near the front of the stage. 


Pry. 
La no! my Lady; did you hear any thing? 


Lady S. 
No, nothing at all: why do you look so frighten'd? 


Pry. 
I'm sure the very thoughts of it has made my teeth to chatter like a spoon in an empty dish. I never heard of such things being heard in any house, except the old Castle of Allcrest, just before the Earl, your grandfather, died. Mercy on us! there was no such noises heard in our village. 


Lady S. 
Apparitions seldom visit people of low condition, Pry. 


Pry. 
God be praised for it! I hope this here will be of the same way of thinking. I would not be a great lady and have ghosts grunting at my bed side for the whole universal world. If you please, my Lady, I should like to go up to Susan as soon as may be, pardon my boldness, for she is as frighten'd as I am; and I may chance to meet something in the stairs, if I am much later; and I know very well, my Lady, you're not afraid. 


Lady S. 
No, I'm not afraid, but I don't know how---I have a little of I don't know what, that has 

   

come upon me.---You had better sleep on the couch by my bed to-night; I may want my drops ? in the night time.---What o'clock is it? 



Pry. looking at a watch. 
Mercy on us! it's just the very time when it begins.---What's that? 

???????????????????????????????????????? alarmed. 


Lady S. 
Nothing: I heard nothing. 
a long pause; then a deep groan is heard from the bottom of the stage. 
Come, come! stand closer to me Pry. 
taking hold of Pry.  
It had a strange, hollow, unnatural sound. 


Pry. 
Yes; just like a body speaking out of a coffin. 

???????????????????????????????????????? A pause, and then a second groan is heard, louder than the first. 


Lady S. 
Stand closer still, I beseech you: that was horrible! 
putting out her hand, trembling. 
Whe---whe---where is the bell-rope? 


Pry. 
O la! you know well enough it hangs in the other end of the room. 


Lady S. 
Go pull it then: pull it violently. 
 Pry hesitates, and seems very unwilling to go. 
Go, I say! 

????????????????????????????????????????  Pry goes; and as she is half way across the room, another groan, followed by a terrible howl, is heard, and she runs back again to Lady Sarah . 


Lady S. 
O go and do it! for heaven's sake! for God's sake! for mercy's sake do it! 

????????????????????????????????????????  Pry then goes sidling across the floor, looking on every side with terror and suspicion, till she gets to the bell rope which hangs by the head of the 

   

bed and near the door of the room; when, putting out her hand to pull it, Robert , dressed like the devil, rises from behind a great chair close to the bed. Pry screams and runs out of the door, whilst he gives her a claw in the passing, and then advances towards the front of the stage to Lady Sarah . 



Lady S. shrinking back as he advances. 
O come no nearer, whatever thou be, thou black and horrible sight! 
Devil still advances. 
O come no nearer! in the holy name of--- 


Devil. 
Baw! 

???????????????????????????????????????? giving a great howl, and still advancing. 


Lady S. 
In the blessed name of--- 


Devil. 
Baw! 

???????????????????????????????????????? with another howl, and coming very near her. 



Lady S. falling upon her knees, and clasping her hands together. 
? O, as thou art awful, be merciful! O touch me not, for I am a miserable sinner! 


Devil. 
Yea thou art---yea thou art---yea thou art, and thou shalt smart. Ill deeds thou dost, and thou shalt roast. 

???????????????????????????????????????? holding his great claw over her. 



Lady. S. contracting all her body together, and sinking down upon the floor. 
O, as thou art horrible, be merciful! What shall I do? what shall I do? 


Devil. 
Be kind to thy husband's children, or I will tear--- 


Lady S. 
O yes, yes! 


Devil. 
Give them good victuals, and good education, and good clothing, or I will tear thee--- 


Lady S. 
O yes, yes! 


   



Devil. 
And give no more good things to Tony than the rest, or I will--- 
starting back upon hearing a loud knocking at the street-door. 
What's that? 



Lady S. raising her head, and seeing him farther off. 
No more good things to Tony than the rest! It was no devil that spoke those words, I'm sure. 

???????????????????????????????????????? taking courage, and getting up. 



Devil. aside, after moving farther off and listening. 
Faith I'll turn and give her a claw yet! I shall never have another opportunity. 

???????????????????????????????????????? approaching her again. 


Lady S. 
Get along! I know you well enough: you are no devil, but a rascally knave. 

???????????????????????????????????????? setting herself in a posture of defence, when a noise is heard without, and he, taking alarm, makes a hasty exit into the adjoining chamber. 
Enter Seabright , and Pry coming fearfully after him. 



Sea. 
Where is this devil that Pry has been telling me of? 



Lady S. pointing to the adjoining room. 
Follow him ? my dear Sir Anthony! Follow after the rascal. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Seabright into the adjoining room. 



Lady S. calling to him. 
Be sure you don't let him escape.---Have you caught him yet? 



Sea. within 
Yes, I've caught him. 


Lady S. 
Give him a good beating then; don't spare him! he's a good brawny devil! O don't spare him! 

A great scuffle is heard within, and Sea. calls to Lady S . 
I'm dealing with him roughly enough, if that will satisfy you. 
he then calls out as if speaking to the 

   

Devil . 
And take that, and that, and that too, you diabolical rascal! You must have midnight frolicks in my house, must you? 

Enter Sophia alarmed. 



Sophia. 
What is all this? did I not hear my father's voice? 



Lady S. looking suspiciously at her. 
Yes, you know nothing of the matter, innocent lamb! 


Pry. 
I hope my master will give him a sound beating, for I know well enough it is that knave Robert; I could smell the very stink of his tobacco as he claw'd me in the passing. 


Lady S. 
Drag him to the light, Sir Anthony, let us see him stript of his devil's skin. Ha! here he comes. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Seabright dragging in Sir Crafty Supplecoat , who is pulled along very unwillingly, and hiding his face with his arm. 


Pry. 
Why that an't like him neither. Come, ? come! take down your arm, and let us see who you are. 

???????????????????????????????????????? pulling down his arm, and discovering his face. 



All. exclaiming. 
Sir Crafty Supplecoat! 



Soph. clapping her hands. 
O I'm glad of that! I'm so glad that it is only Sir Crafty! I should have been grieved indeed if it had been poor Robert. And so it is you Sir Crafty! ha, ha, ha, ha! 

???????????????????????????????????????? All join her in laughing heartily, whilst Robert , having pulled off his devil's dress, enters accompanied by Sharp and some of the other servants, and joins also in the laugh. 


   




Lady S. going up to Sir Crafty with great indignation. 
And so, Sir Crafty Supplecoat, it is to your midnight mummery I am indebted for the stern and solemn threatenings I have received! I have been visited I find by a devil of consequence. Your earnest zeal for my reformation is, indeed, very flattering. 


Sea. 
Sir Crafty, mean and despicable as you must appear to me, I have too much respect for your situation in life to expose you any longer to this open humiliation and disgrace: Come with me to my dressing room. 


Sir C. 
I protest to you Sir Anthony, and to Lady Sarah, and to all the world if they were here present, that I am in no wise concern'd in what you suspect me of. 


Lady S. 
O certainly you protest, Sir Crafty! but do you think that will pass upon me? Have I not known you since you were a boy but so high, ? with all your little, artful, wriggling, under-hand ways of getting your play fellows' toys from them, which I always despised and contemned? To be sure, you will protest any thing, and in the politest manner too: you will send a message to Sir Anthony to-morrow morning, I make no doubt, to enquire how he does; and to hope that his fists are not too much fatigued with their last night's exertions. 

???????????????????????????????????????? all the servants laugh again. 


Sea. 
Come, come, this is too bad! Retire with me, Sir Crafty; you can say nothing for yourself at 

   

this moment. I am sorry I have rib-roasted you so unmercifully; can you walk? 



Sir C. very shortly. 
Yes, yes. 


Rob. 
O we'll help his honour. 

???????????????????????????????????????? going up with Sharp , very provokingly, to assist him. 


Sir C. 
Keep off, scoundrels! you are at the bottom of all this. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Seabright leading out Sir Crafty in a very rueful plight, followed by Lady Sarah and Sophia , and the servants, endeavouring to stifle their laughter. 

SCENE IV. 

Seabright's library. A great noise and confusion of voices is heard without. 




Seabright. speaking without. 
Torment me no more with these things! I will hear no more complaints, and no more explanations! let me have peace, I beseech you, in mine own house, for one half hour at least. 
He enters much disturb'd, shutting the door violently behind him, and pacing up and down the room, sometimes muttering to himself, and sometimes speaking aloud. 
What! is there no getting on in this upward path of honour, unless we tear our way through all these briars and nettles?---Contention and misery at home! is this the price we pay for honour and distinction in the world? Would no honours take root on my untoward soil, till I had grubb'd up every sprig and shoot of comfort to make room for them? It were better to be a panniered jack-ass, and pick up my scanty provender 

   

from the ditch, than be a garter'd peer in such a home as this.---I had once a home! 
beating his heel rapidly upon the floor. 
---Well, well, well! I have push'd my bark from the shore, and I must take wind and tide as they set. 
Enter Servant . 

Who comes to disturb me now? 


Ser. 
A packet, please your honour, from Mr. Plausible. 



Sea. eagerly. 
Ha! give it me. 
Exit Ser.  
Yes, it is the plan. 
tearing off the cover. 
I hold in my ? hand perhaps, that which shall put every domestic arrangement on such an ample footing, as must extinguish these petty broils. 
a pause, and then his countenance lightening up eagerly. 
Ah, do I indeed grasp in this handful of paper the embryo of my future fortune? In faith I could almost believe that I do! Let me go to my closet and examine it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 

SCENE V. 

A room in the inn. Enter Seabright and Landlady speaking as they enter. 



Sea. 
So, Mr. Plausible is not yet come? 


Land. 
No, your honour, not as I know of. There is a dark-looking, lank gentleman in the cow-yard, just now, asking our Bridget how many pounds of butter may be made out of one cow's milk in a year, and such like, and setting all that she says down in his pocket book. He, he, he! poor thing, she scarcely knows a cow from a sheep, 

   

by reason that she is but a poor pea-picking girl from St. Giles's, that has scarcely been a month in the country; howsomever, he gets wonderfully on with his information. 


Sea. 
Ay, that is him: he has a talent for picking up information upon every subject, and from every body: pray let him know I am here. 
Exit Land . 
--- 
After musing a little while. 
Ten thousand a-year! and the risk of failing but a mere trifle, not to be taken into the calculation. And his reasons are good, obvious, and convincing. But let me be moderate now: let me suppose that it only brings me in six thousand a-year; even that will entitle me to a peerage. 

Enter Plausible . 



Plau. 
I have a request to make to you, Sir Anthony? 


Sea. 
What is that, my dear Plausible? 


Plau. 
? When you purchase the large estate in Shropshire, will you let me have an easy lease of a good pasture farm or two upon it? It will be a country retirement for me; and I find on calculation that a hundred milk-cows, well fed and well managed, will bring in no contemptible revenue. 



Sea. smiling. 
You talk of this estate with great confidence, Plausible. 


Plau. 
Nay, I am only certain of putting the money to buy it into your pocket; you will purchase it or not, as you please. 


Sea. 
I begin, indeed, to think favourably of your scheme, and I appointed you to meet me here, 

   

that we might not he interrupted by Lady Sarah. Women you know are timorous, and have no idea of encreasing a fortune except by saving. We shall look over your calculations together. If salt is raised but one penny in the pound, how many thousands do I put in my pocket? 


Plau. 
This paper will inform you exactly. And you see I have put but one penny upon the pound; for salt being a necessary of life, greatly to increase its price would be hard and unfeeling; it would make you unpopular in the country, and in the end create a resistance detrimental to its own ends. ? I am for moderate and sure gains. 



Sea. taking the paper. 
I esteem you for it; my ideas coincide with yours most perfectly in this particular: and the paper also in which you have drawn out your plan for buying up the rock-salt, I should be glad to look over that. 


Plau. 
Here it is in my pocket. 

Enter Beaumont and William Beaumont . 




Sea. angrily. 
Who comes now? O it is you, Beaumont. We are busy; I shall come to you by-and-bye, but at present I cannot be interrupted. 


Bea. 
I must speak with you, my friend. 


Sea. 
Not at present---you see I am engaged. 



Bea. beckoning him. 
But one word in your ear, I beseech you. 


Sea. 
Yes, by-and-bye; at present I am busy with affairs of importance. 


   



Bea. 
By-and-bye will, perhaps, be too late; I must speak with you immediately. 

???????????????????????????????????????? beckoning him again. 



Sea. impatiently. 
I cannot speak with you just now, Beaumont, and I will not. 


Bea. 
No, no! you will. If there be any love of God or any love of man in your heart, you will speak with me. 



Sea. softened. 
Well then. 
goes to Beaumont , who whispers in his ear and endeavours to draw him away. 
No, I won't go with you, Beaumont, to be ? retarded and cross'd with your fears and suspicions: Speak out boldly, and Mr. Plausible will answer for himself. 
smiling to Plau.  
I believe we must explain our plan to this good friend of mine, for he thinks you are going to ruin me, and he is miserably afraid of projectors; ha, ha, ha! 



Plau. smiling placidly. 
I esteem him for the interest he takes in his friend, and I don't condemn his suspicions: there are so many absurd schemes in the world, that it is prudent to be distrustful; but I will shew him the firm ground on which we rest, and he will be satisfied. Do me the honour, my dear Sir, to sit down by me, and I'll explain it to you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? to Beau.  


Bea. 
Pray don't take that trouble, Mr. Plausible: I have no information for enabling me to judge of it: my mind has been little exercised in regard to the money affairs of the world. But 

   

though I am not a man of the world, I have one or two things to say to my friend that I wish him to attend to. 



Sea. smiling rather contemptuously. 
Well, what are they Beaumont? you are, indeed, not a man of the world. 


Bea. 
Every man who risks his fortune in any ? scheme, believes he has good grounds to rest upon: they are such as appear feasible to him. 


Sea. 
Feasible! ours is certain. 



Bea. shaking his head. 
A man who is anxious to get rich is apt to let his judgment be imposed upon, and forgets how many have fail'd in the same track before him. 


Sea. 
I wish those who are apt to give advice, would take the same thing into their consideration. 


Bea. 
Nay, my friend, there is a social influence which we all have, even the meanest of us, over one another, and there is more advice taken in the world than you are aware of. But had every adviser from the beginning of time fail'd before me, I will never believe that he who pleads to a father in behalf of his own children will speak without effect. Hear me then; let him who stands alone, run every risk to aggrandize himself, but let a father---O let the father of a family consider! 


Plau. 
You forget, my good Sir, that the father of a family has a higher motive than any other man to aggrandize himself. 


   




Sea. vehemently. 
Rather than not place my children in the situation I desire for them, I would have no children at all. 



Bea. with warmth. 
? What, will you say of creatures passing onward to the noblest destination, you had rather they had never been, unless they can gather up so much dust and trash on their way? You think yourself an ambitious parent---O I would be for them a thousand times more ambitious than thou art. 


Sea. 
Yes, you will shape your son's fortune out of the clouds, I make no doubt. 

???????????????????????????????????????? smiling contemptuously. 



Will. B. who has modestly kept behind, now coming forward with spirit. 
Wherever my fortune may be shaped for me, to be the honest, well principled son of an honest, and good father, is a distinction I would not give up for all that you, and men like you, are scrambling for. 
turning to Beau.  
Come away, father; they but mock at what you say. 


Bea. 
Let him mock if he will, but let him hear me. 


Plau. 
He will hear your advice with great pleasure from the pulpit, Mr. Beaumont. 


Will. B. 
It would have been happy for the unfortunate men who have listened to yours, Mr. Plausible, if they had received it from the same place. 
pulling Beaumont away. 
Come away, father, you but waste words upon them. 


   



Bea. 
? Nay, I would yet try if there is not some heart in him to be moved. 


Sea. 
My dear Beaumont, you are a very good man, but you know nothing of the matter. 



Will. B. pulling away his father. 
Leave them, leave them, Sir! Good man, as he contemptuously calls you, you are also wise enough for me: and I would not exchange fathers with the proudest young lord in the kingdom. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Beau. and Will. B. Will. putting his father's arm proudly under his, and walking off with spirit. 


Plau. 
We are obliged to that young dog, however, for taking him away. 


Sea. 
Yes; but we will go to another room, for he may return again. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.


   


ACT V. 

SCENE I. 

Seabright 's library. He is discovered sitting by a table fast asleep, on which are scattered letters and papers. Enter Pry softly behind on her tiptoes, and making a long neck to see what he is about. 




Pry. shaking her head piteously. 
Poor man! poor man! he can't sleep in his bed o'nights, and yet he has never committed any wicked crimes, that I ever heard of. 



Sea. angrily, after speaking inarticulately to himself in his sleep. 
You don't know my name! 
muttering again inarticulately. 
The name of Lord Sea-bright. 
muttering again, whilst Pry slips still nearer to him, listening with a face of great curiosity. 
I can't walk in my robes any longer.---See how the crowd stares at me; ha, ha, ha! 
laughing uncouthly, and Pry , drawing still nearer him, comes against a chair on her way, the noise of which wakes him, and she retires precipitately. 
What's that? 
rubbing his eyes and looking round. 
It has been some noise in my dream. Ah! would it had been a reality!---What a busy, prosperous, animating world I have been in for these last two hours. 
looking at his watch. 
Ha! I have 

   

slept only a quarter of an hour; and I have enjoyed as many honours in that short term as would enrich my life-time.---Shall they indeed enrich it?---Wise men, in former ages, consider'd the visions of our sleep as faintly sketching out what is to happen, like trees and castles seen thro' the morning mist, before the brightening sun gives to them the distinct clearness of reality. 
smiling animatedly. 
In faith I could almost believe it! There is that invigorating ? confidence within me which says I shall not stop short at these paltry attainments---A baronet! every body now is a baronet.---My soul disdains the thought! 

???????????????????????????????????????? gives his chair a kick, and overturning it with a great noise, 
Enter Pry alarmed. 



Pry. 
O la, Sir! what is the matter? 


Sea. 
What, are you up Pry? Why are you out of bed so late? 


Pry. 
Making your coffee, Sir. 


Sea. 
Did not I tell you to leave it on the lamp, and go to bed? 


Pry. 
Yes; but I thought it would keep warmer, some how, if I sat by it myself. 



Sea. aside. 
Great fool! 
aloud. 
Let me have some of it then; my head will be clearer afterwards for writing. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 



Pry. shaking her head, and looking after him as he goes out. 
Poor man! he would have every body to go to bed but himself. What has he got here now? 
looking at the papers on the table. 
Copies of letters to my Lord B---, and notes for a speech on the 

   

salt duties; and calculations.---O lud, lud! What a power of trouble he does give himself! Poor man! poor man! 
Exit in a hurry, calling out as she goes. 
I just stay'd behind, Sir, to stir the fire for you. 

SCENE II. 

A room in the inn. Enter Mrs. Beaumont and Landlady , by different sides. 



Land. 
La, madam! here be the great Lord, Lady Sarah Seabright's brother, who wants to see you. 


Mrs. B. 
Wants to see me? how comes this great condescension? 


Land. 
I reckon, madam, that some misfortune has befallen him, and that makes some folks wonderfully well bred. I was just standing at the door, a few minutes ago, and thinking, to be sure, nothing at all of the matter, when who should I see drive past but my Lord, just turning the corner as he used to do to Sir Anthony's gate. Well, I thinks no more of the matter, when in a trice by comes that saucy-looking gentleman of his, that turns up his nose at my ale, and puts a letter into his lord's hand; upon which, after he had read it, he desired his postillions to turn round and set him down here. I'm as sure as I am a living woman that something has happen'd, for he came into the house with a face as white as my apron. 


Mrs. B. 
And wants to see me? 


Land. 
Yes, madam; he ask'd first of all for Mr. Beaumont, and finding he was walk'd out, he ask'd next for you. 


   



Mrs. B. 
? But how did he know we were here? 


Land. 
La, madam! he saw your carriage in the yard, and moreover your man told him that his master and mistress had stopp'd here, on their way to Yorkshire, to see Sir Anthony's children. But here he comes, madam. Save us all! how proud and how vexed he looks! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit. 
Enter Lord Allcrest . 



Lord A. 
Madam, I am sorry to find Mr. Beaumont is gone out: I had something of importance to communicate to him, but I believe it will be nearly the same thing if I impart it to you. I---I--- 
seems embarrassed. 
---it is an unfortunate affair. As to myself, I have little to do with it; but it is right that the near relations of Sir Anthony Seabright should know, that his salt scheme has entirely fail'd, and he is involved in utter ruin; they can communicate the dreadful tidings to him more properly than I can. 


Mrs. B. 
We are obliged to you, my Lord; it is a piece of intelligence we have every day expected to hear, but which does not certainly concern us more nearly than yourself, as I, who am Sir Anthony's connexion, stand exactly in the same degree of relation to him with your Lordship. 


Lord A. 
Yes; my sister, indeed, would gratify ? very foolishly a foolish inclination---but it is a recent thing, scarcely to be consider'd as a---a--- a---he had many children by your sister, and lived with her many years. 


   




Mrs. B. smiling with great contempt. 
I don't know, indeed, at what time, from the date of a man's marriage, he is entitled to claim affinity with his wife's relations: perhaps it varies with occurrences, and misfortunes certainly have no tendency to shorten it. 


Lord A. 
Madam, let me have the honour to inform you, that there is no term in which the chief of a noble and ancient family can be contaminated by the inferior alliances of those individuals who belong to his family: such things are consider'd as mere adventitious circumstances. 


Mrs. B. 
You teach me, my Lord, to make very nice distinctions; and therefore, whilst I pay all respect to you as the representative of a noble family, you must likewise permit me to express for you, as an individual, sentiments of a very opposite nature. 


Lord A. 
Good breeding, madam, will not permit me to return such an answer as you deserve; and therefore I will no longer intrude on your time. 


Mrs. B. 
? A better excuse, perhaps, might be found; but any one will be perfectly acceptable that procures me the pleasure of wishing your Lordship good morning. 

???????????????????????????????????????? As Lord Allcrest is about to go out, enter Beaumont and Morgan , and prevent him. 


Bea. 
I am sorry, my Lord, I was not in the way when you did me the honour to enquire for me. 



Lord A. passing him abruptly with a slight bow. 
Good morning, Sir; good morning. 


   




Bea. going after him. 
You are not going to leave me thus, my Lord, angry and disturb'd as you appear to be? I cannot suffer any body, man, woman, or child, to leave me offended, if it be possible for me to part with them on more amicable terms. I flatter myself it is possible to do so on the present occasion; I am sure, I am confident of it, if you will do me the honour to explain in what way I can be useful to you. 


Lord A. 
I came here, Sir, upon no concerns of my own; and the conversation I have had the honour to hold with this Lady, makes any explanation of the business that brought me unnecessary. 


Bea. 
But she is angry too, I perceive, and I will have no explanation from her. I know already the unfortunate affairs of poor Seabright; and I can explain to myself the intention of your Lordship's visit: you must have the goodness to stay and hear ? if I explain it right. 
taking him by the coat and preventing him from going. 
Nay, nay, my Lord! the spirit of charity and of peace-making makes a well-meaning man very bold,---you shall stay. 



Lord A. relenting, and turning back. 
I do believe, Mr. Beaumont, that you are a very good man, and as such I respect you; but since you already know the misfortune of Sir Anthony Seabright, and will, from the dictates of your own good heart, open the matter to him in the best manner possible, my business with you is anticipated. 


   



Mrs. B. 
Not, I believe, entirely, my Lord; for he knows nothing at all, as yet, of those nice distinctions between individual and family relationship, which may be necessary to prevent him from forming any unreasonable expectations from a noble brother-in-law. I presume your Lordship means to hurry back to town again, without seeing Sir Anthony. 


Bea. 
Hold your tongue, Susan; your spirit is less mild than it ought to be, considering the warm good heart it belongs to. It is not so: his lordship did not intend returning to town without seeing his distress'd friend; you are wrong in the very outset of your account. Is she not, my Lord? 



Lord A. confused and hesitating. 
? If my seeing him could be of any real service, I should never--- I could not certainly have thought of returning without seeing him.---But he has never attended to my opinions: my advice has been disregarded--- and then, his damn'd vanity: he refused an office the other day, which I would have procured for him, that would have been a competency for life--- it makes me mad to think of it. 


Bea. 
Ah, my Lord! he is in that state in which a man's errours should be remember'd only by himself: he is in adversity. 


Lord A. 
He has thought only of himself, I'm sure. 


Bea. 
His connexion with your sister has, indeed, been unlucky; and I can, in some degree, sympathize with your resentment. 


   



Lord A. 
You mistake me, Sir; his connexion with my sister is of no consequence to me; and I shall take care that it shall be of as little to her as possible, for I will make her independent of him: but children!---risking every thing on one single stake, with a family of children!---I am provoked beyond all measure when I think of this. 



Mrs. B. bridling up. 
His children, my Lord--- 


Bea. 
? Now pray, my dear, hold your tongue, if it be possible! We are weak, passionate creatures, why should we rub and fret one another thus? 
to Lord A.  
I praise you much, my Lord, for the interest you take in the children; but here is a good man 
pointing to Morgan . 
who will--- 


Mor. 
Stop, stop, my good friend, and don't now lead me into any discussion upon this subject. I am disturb'd, and uncomfortable, and unequal to it. Take his Lordship by himself; and say to him what you please for me. 
to Mrs. B.  
Come with me, niece. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt Mor. and Mrs. B. 


Bea. 
Let me have the pleasure of attending your Lordship into the fields, where we can take a short turn or two, and speak of this subject at length: I see strangers arrived; and it is noisy here. 


Lord A. 
Most willingly. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE III. 

Seabright 's house. Enter Seabright , followed by Sophia , the eldest boy , and the little girl . 



Soph. 
Indeed, papa, you are in such good humour this morning we can't help following you. I hope we are not troublesome; if we are, I'll take the children away. 


Sea. 
No, my good children, you are not troublesome; you shan't go away. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The children hang on his coat, and look up in his face much pleased. 


Soph. 
They are so glad to hang upon you again, papa; and you are so good humour'd this morning! 


Sea. 
I finish'd my papers last night; and I have had some pleasant dreams too.---This is a chearful, enlivening morning: every thing is in bright sunshine around us: it is like a day that wears good fortune on its face:---and, perhaps, it does. 


Soph. 
I hope it does: and now that you seem so happy, papa, I would fain plead to you in behalf of a poor good man, who is not very happy at present. 


Sea. 
And who is that? 


Soph. 
Ah, you know very well; it is poor Robert. I know it was very wrong in him to frighten Lady Sarah; but he meant it for our good, and he will break his heart if he is not allow'd to be with us again. 


   



Sea. 
Say no more of this at present, Sophia; and, ? perhaps, by-and-bye, he may return to us again as your own servant. 


Soph. 
Ha! 
surprised. 


Sea. 
Yes, my sweet girl; I will be very liberal to you and to all my children: I will make a good amends to you for all that is past. 
turning to the boy. 
And you, my good boy, I must think of you by-and-bye. Thou art become a stout boy, George: let me look at thy face. 
lifting up his hair from his forehead. 
Ay, it is a comely face enough: it will make a very good countenance for an admiral, or a general, or even for the woolsack, if thine inclinations should lead thee that way. Let me feel thy weight too, young rogue. 
taking him up in his arms. 
Ah! would now that I could but know the rank and eminence of the future man I hold in these arms! 


Soph. 
My dear Sir, you are so good to us, and so good humoured this morning, I could wager those letters by the post have brought you pleasant news. 


Sea. 
Letters by the post! I have received none. 


Soph. 
Then you have not read them yet. You slept so much longer than usual this morning, that you were not up when they came, and they were ? put on the table in the next room. 

???????????????????????????????????????? pointing off the stage. 


Sea. 
Let me see them, then; if they bring me any good news they are welcome. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit with a light active step. 


   



Soph. 
Now, children, did not I tell you yesterday that papa would love us again; and you see he has begun to do it already. 


Boy. 
And so he does, Sophy; and I'm sorry I spoke so naughtily of him, for my heart jumps so when he loves me! 
looking off the stage. 
But see! what is he about now, beating his forehead and walking up and down so strangely? 


Soph. 
O dear! something is the matter. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exit, alarmed. 



Boy. to little girl. 
Now don't ask me for those marbles at present, Emma; I can't find them, I don't know where they are. 
looking off the stage again. 
O how terrible he looks! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Re-enter Seabright , with an open letter in his hand, beating his head with his clench'd hands, and tossing about his arm distractedly, followed by Sophia , who seems frightened at him, and yet wishing to sooth him. A long pause, in which he paces up and down the stage followed by Sophia , whilst the children run into a corner, frightened, and stare at him. 



Soph. after attempting in vain several times to speak. 
My father! my dear, dear father! 
he still paces up and down without heeding her. 
O if you would but speak two words, and tell what is the matter with you, my dear, dear Sir! 


Sea. 
I am ruined, and deceived, and undone! I am a bankrupt and a beggar!---I have made beggars of you all! 


   



Soph. 
O no, father! that won't be! for God's sake don't take on so violently! 



Sea. still pacing up and down, followed by Soph.  
? I am a bankrupt and a beggar!---disgrace, and ridicule, and contempt!---Ideot, ideot, ideot! O worse than ideot! 


Soph. 
Dear father! 

???????????????????????????????????????? The children run and take hold of Sophia , as she follows him. 


Sea. 
Come not near me---come not near me, children---I have made beggars of you all! 


Soph. 
But we will come near you, my dear father, and love you and bless you too, whatever you have done. Ay, and if we are beggars, we will beg with you, and beg for you cheerfully. 


Sea. 
Oh, oh, oh! This is more than I can bear! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Throws himself into a chair, quite overcome, whilst the children stand gazing on him, and Sophia hangs over him affectionately. 
Enter Lady Sarah . 



Lady S. 
What are you doing here, children?--- What is all this for?---What is the matter with you, Sir Anthony?---No answer at all!---What letter is this? 
picks up the letter which Seabright had dropt in his agitation, and reads it; then breaking out violently. 
O, I told you it would come to this!--- I counsel'd you---I warn'd you---I beseech'd you. O Sir Anthony! Sir Anthony! what devil tempted you to such madness as this? 


Soph. 
Oh, madam, do not upbraid him! See how he is! 


   



Lady S. 
I see how it is well enough: the devil, the devil of ambition has tempted him--- 
going nearer him with great vehemence. 
Did not I tell you that with prudence, and management, and ? economy, we should in the end amass a good fortune? but you must be in such a hurry to get rich! ---O it would get the better of a saint's spirit to think how I have saved, and regulated, and laid down rules for my houshold, and that it should all come to this!---To have watched, and toiled, and fretted as I have done, and all to no purpose!---If I did not begrudge the very food that was consumed in the family!---If I did not try all manner of receipts that the wife of the meanest citizen would scarcely have thought of!---If I did not go a bargain hunting thro' every shop in London, and purchase damaged muslins even for my own wearing! ---It is very hard---it is very hard indeed! 
bursting into tears. 
O it is enough to turn a woman's brains! 



Sea. starting up in a rage. 
By heavens, madam, it is enough to turn a man's brains to think, that, in addition to the ruin I have brought upon myself and my children, I have taken to my bosom---I have set over their innocent heads, a hard-hearted, narrow, avaricious woman, whose meanness makes me contemptible, whose person and character I despise!---This, madam, the spirit of ambition, which you talk of, has tempted me to do, and ? for this, more than all his other malice, I will curse him! 


   




Soph. endeavouring to sooth him. 
Pray be not so violent with her! she does not consider what she says---she did not intend to hurt you. 


Lady S. 
Sir Anthony Seabright, you are a base man and a deceiver: my brother shall know how you have used me: he has made you a Member of Parliament and a Baronet. 


Sea. 
Yes, and a contemptible fool, and a miserable wretch into the bargain. But no, no, no! I have made myself so; I deserve my punishment.--- 
???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Lord Allcrest, Beaumont, Morgan, Mrs. B. and William B.  
And here are more of my advisers and beseechers come to visit me: advance, advance, good friends! you are come to look upon a ruined man, and you are gratified. 



Bea. going up to him affectionately. 
No, my dear Seabright; in a very different spirit are we come: we come to sympathize with you, and to console you. 


Sea. 
I hate sympathy, and I hate consolation! You are come, I suppose, to sympathize with me too, my Lord, and to put me in mind of the damn'd place I have given up to that knave Sir Crafty Supplecoat. 


Lord A. 
? No, Sir Anthony, I scorn to upbraid, but I pretend neither to sympathize with you nor to console you: I come to rescue my sister from a situation unworthy a daughter of the house of Allcrest, and she shall go home with me. 


   



Sea. 
Nay, by the sincerity of a miserable man, but you do console me.---Take her o' God's name! I received her not half so willingly as I resign her to you again. 

???????????????????????????????????????? taking Lady Sarah 's hand to give her to her brother, which she pulls away from him angrily, and going up to Lord Allcrest , gives him her hand as an act of her own. 


Lady S. 
If my brother will indeed have the goodness! 



Boy. skipping joyfully. 
Sophy! sister Sophy! she is going away from us! is not that nice? 


Soph. 
Hush, George! 



Sea. to Mrs. B. on perceiving her smile to herself. 
Yes, madam, I make no doubt, but all this is very amusing to you---you are also come, no doubt, to bestow upon me your contribution of friendly sympathy. 


Mrs. B. 
Indeed, Sir Anthony, recollecting the happiness you have enjoyed, and the woman that shared it with you, you are entitled to no small portion of pity. 



Bea. to Mrs. B.  
Fie upon it! fie upon it, Susan! can't you hold out your hand to him, and forgive him nobly, without tacking those little ungracious ? recollections to it? 
to Sea.  
Indeed, my dear Seabright, you look upon us all with the suspicious eye of an unfortunate man, but we are truly come to you in kindness and Christian simplicity; and we bring you comfort. 


Sea. 
Yes, Beaumont, you come to me in simplicity. What comfort can you bring to me, ruined 

   

as I am? all my fair prospects blasted! all my honours disgraced! sunk even to obscurity and contempt! ---you are indeed come in great simplicity. 


Bea. 
What comfort can we bring to you? does grandeur and riches include the whole of human happiness, that you should now feel yourself inconsolable and hopeless? Cannot a quiet, modest retreat, independent of the bustle of the world, still be a situation of comfort? 


Sea. 
I know what you mean: contemptible, slothful obscurity. 


Bea. 
You mistake me, Sir Anthony; respectable and useful privacy. 


Sea. 
I understand you well enough: hopeless and without object---I abhor it! 


Bea. 
What, Seabright! can a man with a family to grow up around him, be hopeless and without object? Come here children, and speak for ? yourselves. 

???????????????????????????????????????? he takes the children in his hands, and encouraging Sophia to come forward, they surround Seabright . 



Soph. after endeavouring in vain to speak, and kissing her father's hand tenderly. 
O my dear father! in the loneliest cottage in England I could be happy with you. I would keep it so neat and comfortable, and do every thing for you so willingly; and the children would be so good, if you would but love us enough to be happy with us! 



Sea. catching her in his arms. 
Come to my heart, my admirable girl! thou truly hast found the way to it, and a stubborn unnatural heart it has been.--- 

   

But I will love you all---yes my children, I will love you enough to be happy with you. 
pausing. 
I hope I shall---I think I shall. 



Will. B. eagerly. 
Yes, you will! yes, you will! if there be one spark of a true man in your breast, you will love them to the last beat of your heart. 



Bea. smiling affectionately on his son. 
Get away, stripling! your warmth interrupts us. 


Sea. 
O no! let him speak!---say all of you what you please to me now: Say any thing that will break the current of my miserable thoughts; for we are at this moment indulging fancies as illusive as those that formerly misled me; even the cottage that we talk of, a peaceful home for my children, is no ? longer in my power. 



Bea. going up to Morgan . 
Now, my friend, this is the time for you to step forth, and make a subdued father and his innocent children happy: bestow your wealth liberally, and the blessings that will fall upon your grey head, shall well reward the toils and dangers that have earn'd it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Leading him up to Seabright . 


Sea. 
Ha! what stranger is this? I observed him not before. 


Bea. 
Speak for yourself now, Mr. Morgan, I will do no more for you. 


Sea. 
Mr. Morgan, the uncle of my Caroline! 


Mor. 
Yes, Sir Anthony, and very much disposed, if you will give him leave, to---to love---to befriend 

   

---to be to you and yours---to be the uncle and friend of you all. 

???????????????????????????????????????? speaking in a broken agitated voice. 


Sea. 
O no! I am unworthy to receive any thing from you---from the uncle of my much injured wife; but these children, Mr. Morgan---I am not too proud to ask you to be a friend to them. 



Bea. hastily to Sea.  
Poo, man! you have no real goodness in you, if you cannot perceive that he must and will be a friend to yourself also. Come, come! give him a hand of fellowship! 
putting Seabright 's hand into Morgan 's. 
Now, God ? will bless you both! 


Mor. 
If Sir Anthony will permit an old man, who has past thro' many buffetings of fortune, to draw his arm-chair by him in the evening of his life, and tell over the varied hardships he has met with, he will cheer its gloom, and make it pass more pleasantly. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Sea. presses Morgan 's hand to his breast, without speaking. 



Mrs. B. to Mor.  
Well said, and gracefully said, my good uncle! did not I tell you, you would go through your part well, if you would but trust to the dictates of your own good heart? 


Bea. 
O there is nobody, when he does what is noble and right, that does not find a way of doing it gracefully. 



Mrs. B. to Sophia , who is going up timidly to Mor.  
Yes, that is right, my dear. Come, children, 
leading the children up to him. 
gather all about him. Yes, take hold of him; don't be afraid to 

   

touch him; it does young people good to pat the cheeks of a benevolent old man. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Mor. embraces them affectionately. 



Wil. B. joining the children in caressing Mor. --- 
My dear Mr. Morgan, I love you with all my soul! ---And my sweet Sophy---my good Sophy, don't you love him too?---She is such a good girl, Mr. Morgan! 


Mor. 
So she is, William; and she must have a good husband by-and-bye to reward her. I dare ? say we shall find some body or other willing to have her. 

???????????????????????????????????????? smiling archly upon William , who looks abashed; and letting go Sophy 's hand retires behind. 



Sea. to Mor.  
I have now voice enough, my generous friend, to say that I am sensible of your goodness: but there are feelings which depress me--- 


Mor. 
Say no more about it, my good Sir; I am happy, and I would have every body to rejoice with me. 



Lord A. to Mor. leading forward Lady Sarah . 
And every body does rejoice with you, my good Sir. Permit me to assure you, that tho', perhaps, somewhat injured with the ways of the world, I have not been an unfeeling spectator of what has pass'd; and I believe Lady Sarah also has not looked upon it with indifference. 
turning to Sea.  
Now, Sir Anthony, I would, if possible, part friends with you; and I have a favour to request, which will, if 

   

it is granted, make me forget every unpleasant thing that has pass'd between us. 


Sea. 
Mention it, my Lord; I will not willingly refuse you. 


Lord A. 
My sister has just now told me, that she will leave you without regret, if you will let her have your youngest boy to live with her: I join my request to her's. 



Boy. eagerly. 
? What, take Tony away from us! no but she shant tho'! 


Sea. 
I am much obliged to you, my Lord, and to Lady Sarah also; but I cannot find in my heart to divide my children. He shall, however, visit her frequently, if she will permit him; and if she will have the goodness to forget the hasty words of a passionate man, and still take an interest in any thing that belongs to him, he will be gratified by it. 


Soph. 
And I will visit Lady Sarah too, if she will have the goodness to permit me. 


Lady S. 
I thank you, my dear; it is, perhaps, more than I deserve. 
to Mrs. B.  
And may I hope, madam, that you will forget whatever unpleasant things may have pass'd between us? 



Bea. interrupting his wife as she is about to speak. 
Now answer her pleasantly, my dear Susan! 
Mrs. B. smiles pleasantly, and gives her hand to Lady Sarah . 
Now every thing is right. O it is a pleasant thing to find that there is some good in every human being! 
Enter a Servant, and whispers to Bea.  

Is he here? let him enter then. 


   



Sea. 
Who is it? I can see nobody now. 


Bea. 
Don't be alarmed: it is a friend of your's, who has offended you, and takes a very proper season to be forgiven. It is one who durst not, in your prosperity, shew you the extent of his attachment; ? but he is now come, for he has already open'd his mind to me upon hearing of your misfortunes, to put into your hands, for the benefit of your children, all the little money he has saved, since he first began to lay up one mite after another, and to call it his own property. 


Sea. 
Who can that be? I did not think there was a creature in the world that bore us so much affection. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Robert , who starts back upon seeing so many people. 


Bea. 
Come in, my good Robert: 
taking his hand and leading him forward. 
thou need'st not be ashamed to shew thy face here: there is nobody here who will not receive thee graciously, not even Lady Sarah herself. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The children and every body gather 'round Robert . 



Sea. coming forward with Bea.  
Ah, my dear Beaumont, what a charm there is in doing good! it can give dignity to the meanest condition. Had this unlucky scheme but succeeded, for if we could have but weather'd it a little while longer it must have succeeded, I should have been--- I think I should have been, munificent as a prince. 


   



Bea. 
Ah, no more of that, my dear friend! no more of that! such thoughts are dangerous, and the enemy is still at hand: chide the deceiver away from you, even when he makes his appearance in ? the fair form of virtue. 

Back matter 

FINIS.


?
?

NOTES
^ List of speakers 

ALL
BEA
BEO
BOY
COOK
DEVIL
ELDEST BOY
FIRST SER
GAR
LADY S
LADY. S
LAND
LITTLE GIRL
LITTLE ONE
LORD A
MOR
MRS. B
NURSE
PLAU
PRO
PRY
ROB
ROBERT
ROV
SEA
SEABRIGHT
SER
SHARP
SIR C
SIR. C
SOPH
SOPHIA
SUPH
WIL
WIL. B
WILL
WILL. B

?





  


THE DREAM: 
A TRAGEDY, IN PROSE, 
IN THREE ACTS. 


  


Front matter 

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

MEN. 

WOMEN. 


Osterloo , an Imperial General. 
Prior of the Monastery. 
Benedict , Monk. 
Jerome , Monk. 
Paul , Monk. 
Morand , Officer in the Service of the Prior . 
Wovelreid , Officer in the Service of the Prior . 
The Imperial Ambassador.
Officers serving under Osterloo . 
Sexton, Monks, Soldiers, Peasants, &c.
Leonora,
Agnes.

Scene , the Monastery of St. Maurice in Switzerland; a Castle near it. 

Time , the middle of the th Century. 



   


Main text 

ACT I. 

SCENE I. 

---A Court within the Monastery, with a grated iron Gate opening into an outer Court, through which are seen several Peasants waiting; Jerome is discovered on the front of the Stage, walking backwards and forwards in a disturbed Manner, then stopping and speaking to himself. 



Jer. 
Twice in one night the same awful vision repeated! And Paul also terrified with a similar visitation! This is no common accidental mimicry of sleep: the shreds and remnants of our day-thoughts, put together at night in some fantastic incongruous form, as the drifting clouds of a broken-up storm piece themselves again into uncertain shapes of rocks and animals. No, no! there must be some great and momentous meaning in this. 

Enter Benedict behind him. 



Ben. 
Some great and momentous meaning in this! What art thou musing upon? 


   



Jer. 
Be satisfied! be satisfied! It is not always fitting that the mind should lay open the things it is busy withal, though an articulate sound may sometimes escape it to set curiosity on the rack. Where is brother Paul? Is he still at his devotions? 


Ben. 
I believe so. But look where the poor Peasants are waiting without: it is the hour when they expect our benefactions. Go, and speak to them: thou hast always been their favourite confessor, and they want consolation. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Beckoning the Peasants , who thereupon advance through the gate, while Jerome stretches out his hand to prevent them. 


Jer. 
Stop there! Come not within the gates! ? I charge you advance no farther. 
To Benedict angrily 
There is death and contagion in every one of them, and yet thou would'st admit them so near us. Dost thou indeed expect a miracle to be wrought in our behalf? Are we not flesh and blood? and does not the grave yawn for us as well as other men? 
To the Peasants still more vehemently 

Turn, I charge you, and retire without the gate. 


st Peas. 
Oh! be not so stern with us, good Father! There are ten new corpses in the village since yesterday, and scarcely ten men left in it with strength enough to bury them. The best half of the village are now under ground, who, but three weeks gone by, were all alive and well. O do not chide us away! 


   



d Peas. 
God knows if any of us shall ever enter these gates again; and it revives us to come once a day to receive your blessings, good Fathers. 


Jer. 
Well, and you shall have our blessing, my Children; but come not so near us; we are mortal men like yourselves, and there is contagion about you. 


st Peas. 
Ah! no, no! Saint Maurice will ? take care of his own; there is no fear of you, Fathers. 


Jer. 
I hope he will; but it is presumptuous to tempt danger. Retire, I beseech you, and you shall have relief given to you without the gates. If you have any love for us, retire. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The Peasants retire. 


Ben. 
Well, I feel a strong faith within me, that our Saint, or some other good spirit, will take care of us. How is it that thou art so alarmed and so vehement with those good people? It is not thy usual temper. 


Jer. 
Be satisfied, I pray thee: I cannot tell thee now. Leave me to myself a little while.--- Would to God brother Paul were come to me! Ha! here he is. 
Enter Paul ; and Jerome , after waiting impatiently till Benedict retires, advances to him eagerly. 

Was it to a spot near the black monument in the stranger's burying vault, that it pointed? 


   



Paul. 
Yes, to the very spot described by thee yesterday morning, when thou first told'st me thy dream: and, indeed, every circumstance of my last night's vision strongly resembled thine; or rather, I should say, was the same. The fixed frown of it's ghastly face--- 


Jer. 
Aye, and the majestic motion of its limbs. Did it not wear a mantle over its right ? shoulder, as if for concealment rather than grace? 


Paul. 
I know not; I did not mark that: but it strode before me as distinctly as ever mortal man did before my waking sight; and yet as no mortal man ever did before the waking sight. 


Jer. 
But it appeared to thee only once. 


Paul. 
Only once; for I waked under such a deep horror, that I durst not go to sleep again. 


Jer. 
When it first appeared to me, as I told thee, the night before last, the form, though distinctly, was but faintly imaged forth; and methought it rose more powerfully to my imagination as I told it to thee, than in the dream itself. But last night, when it returned, it was far more vivid than before. I waked indeed as thou did'st, impressed with a deep horror, yet irresistible sleep seized upon me again; and O how it appeared to me the third time, like a palpable, horrid reality! 
???????????????????????????????????????? After a pause 
What is to be done? 


   



Paul. 
What can be done? We can stop no division of the Imperial army till one shall really ? march by this pass. 


Jer. 
And this is not likely; for I received a letter from a friend two days ago, by an express messenger, who says, he had delayed sending it, hoping to have it conveyed to me by one of Count Osterloo's soldiers, who, with his division, should have marched through our pass, but was now, he believed, to conduct them by a different route. 


Paul. 
What noise and commotion is that near the gate? 
Calling to those without 

Ho there! What is the matter? 



st Peas. without 
Nothing, Father; but we hear a trumpet at a distance, and they say, there is an army marching amongst the mountains. 


Jer. 
By all our holy saints, if it be so--- 
Calling again to the st Peas.  

Are ye sure it is trumpets you hear? 


st Peas. 
As sure as we ever heard any sound, and here is a lad too, who saw from the top-most crag, with his own eyes, their banners waving at a distance. 



Jer. to Paul  
What think'st thou of it? 


Paul. 
We must go to the Prior, and reveal the whole to him directly. Our own lives and those of the whole brotherhood depend upon ? it; there can be no hesitation now. 


Jer. 
Come then; lose no time. We have a solemn duty imposed upon us. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE II. 

An open Space by the Gate of the Monastery, with a View of the Building on one Side, while Rocks and Mountains, wildly grand, appear in every other Direction, and a narrow Pass through the Mountains opening to the bottom of the Stage. Several Peasants , both Men and Women, are discovered, waiting as if to see some Sight; a Trumpet and warlike Music heard at a little distance. 



st Peas. 
Hear how it echoes amongst the rocks: it is your true warlike sound, that makes a man's heart stir within him, and his feet beat the ground to its measure. 


d Peas. 
Ah! what have our hearts to do with it now, miserable as we are! 


st Peas. 
What have we to do with it! Speak for thyself. Were I to be laid in the grave this very night, it would rouse me to hear those sounds which remind me of the battle of Laupen. 


d Peas. 
Well; look not so proudly at me: though I have not yet fought for my country, I am of a good stock nevertheless: my father lost his life at Morgarten. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Calling up to Morand , who now appears scrambling down the sides of the rocks 
Are they near us, Lieutenant? 


Mor. 
They'll be here in a trice. I know their Ensigns already: they are those brave fellows under the command of Count Osterloo, who 

   

did such good service to the Emperor in his last battle. 


d Peas. Woman 
Aye; they be goodly men no doubt, and bravely accoutred I warrant ye. 


th Peas. Old Woman 
Aye, there be many ? a brave man amongst them I trow, returning to his mother again. My Hubert never returned. 



d Peas. to Mor.  
Count Osterloo! Who is he? 


Mor. 
Did'st thou never hear of him? He has been in as many battles as thou hast been in harvest fields. 


d Peas. 
And won them too? 


Mor. 
Nay, some of them he has won, and some he has lost; but whether his own side were fighting or flying, he always kept his ground, or retreated like a man. The enemy never saw his back. 


st Peas. 
True, Lieutenant; I once knew an old soldier of Osterloo's who boasted much of his General: for his men are proud of him, and would go through flood and flame for his sake. 


Mor. 
Yes, he is affable and indulgent to them, although passionate and unreasonable when provoked; and has been known to punish even his greatest favourites severely for a slight offence. I remember well, the officer I first served under, being a man of this kidney, and--- 


st Peas. 
? Hist, hist! the gates are thrown 

   

open, and yonder come the Monks in procession with the Prior at their head. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Prior and Monks from the Monastery, and range themselves on one side of the stage. 



Prior. to the Peasants 
Retire, my Children, and don't come so near us. Don't stand near the soldiers as they pass neither, but go to your houses. 


st Woman. 
O bless St. Maurice and your holy reverence! We see nothing now but coffins and burials, and hear nothing but the ticking of the death-watch, and the tolling of bells: do let us stand here and look at the brave sight. Lord knows if any of us may be above ground to see such another, a'n it were to pass this way but a week hence. 


Prior. 
Be it so then, Daughter, but keep at a distance on the rocks, where you may see every thing without communicating infection. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The Peasants retire, climbing amongst the rocks: then enter by the narrow pass at the bottom of the stage, Soldiers marching to martial music, with Officers and Osterloo . 



Prior. advancing, and lifting up his hands with solemnity 
Soldiers and Officers, and the noble Chief commanding this band! in the name of our patron St. Maurice, once like yourselves a 

   

valiant soldier upon earth, now a holy, powerful faint in heaven, I conjure you to halt. 



st Off. in the foremost rank 
Say you so, reverend Prior, to men pressing forward as we do, to shelter our head for the night, ? and that cold wintry sun going down so fast upon us? 


st Sold. 
By my faith! if we pass the night here amongst the mountains, it will take something besides prayers and benedictions to keep us alive. 


d Sold. 
Spend the night here amongst chamois and eagles! Some miracle no doubt will be wrought for our accommodation. 


st Off. 
Murmur not, my Friends: here comes your General, who is always careful of you. 



Ost. advancing from the rear 
What is the matter? 



Prior. to Ost.  
You are the commander in chief? 


Ost. 
Yes, reverend Father: and, with all respect and deference, let me say, the night advances fast upon us, Martigny is still at a good distance, and we must not be detained. With many thanks, then, for your intended civilities, we beg your prayers, holy Prior, with those of your pious Monks, and crave leave to pass on our way. 



Prior. lifting his hands as before 
If there be any piety in brave men, I conjure you in the name of St. Maurice to halt! The lives of our whole community depend upon it: 

   

? men, who for your lives have offered to heaven many prayers. 


Ost. 
How may this be, my Lord? Who will attack your sacred walls, that you should want any defence? 


Prior. 
We want not, General, the service of your arms: my own troops, with the brave Captain who commands them, are sufficient to defend us from mortal foes. 



Soldiers. murmuring 
Must we fight with devils then? 


Ost. 
Be quiet, my good Comrades. 
To Prior  
Well, my Lord, proceed. 


Prior. 
A fatal pestilence rages in this neighbourhood; and by command of a vision, which has appeared three times to the Senior of our order, and also to another of our brotherhood, threatening in case of disobedience, that the whole community shall fall victims to the dreadful disease, we are compelled to conjure you to halt. 


Ost. 
And for what purpose? 


Prior. 
That we may chuse by lot from the first division of the Imperial army which marches through this pass, so did the vision precisely ? direct us, a man, who shall spend one night within the walls of our monastery; there to undergo certain penances for the expiation of long-concealed guilt. 


Ost. 
This is very strange. By lot did you say? It will be tedious. There are a hundred of my 

   

men who will volunteer the service.---What say ye, Soldiers? 


st Sold. 
Willingly, General, if you desire it. Yet I marvel what greater virtue there can be in beleagring the war-worn hide of a poor soldier, than the fat sides of a well-fed monk. 


Ost. 
Wilt thou do it, then? 


st Sold. 
Aye; and more than that, willingly, for my General. It is not the first time a cat-o'-nine-tails has been across my back for other men's misdeeds. Promise me a good flask of brandy when I'm done with it, and I warrant ye I'll never winch. As to the saying of Pater-nosters, if there be any thing of that kind tacked to it, I let you to wit my dexterity is but small. 


Ost. 
Then be it as thou wilt, my good friend; yet I had as lief my own skin should smart for it as thine, thou art such a valiant fellow. 


Prior. 
? No, noble General, this must not be; we must have our man chosen by lot. The lives of the whole community depending upon it; we must strictly obey the vision. 


Ost. 
It will detain us long. 


Prior. 
Nay, my Lord; the lots are already prepared. In the first place, six men only shall draw; four representing the soldiers, and two the officers. If the soldiers are taken, they shall draw by companies, and the company that is taken shall draw individually; but if the lot falls to the officers, each of them shall draw for himself. 


   



Ost. 
Let it be so; you have arranged it well. Produce the lots. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The Prior giving the sign, a Monk advances, bearing a stand, on which are placed three vases, and sets it near the front of the stage. 


Prior. 
Now, brave Soldiers, let four from your body advance. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Ost. points to four men, who advance from the ranks. 


Ost. 
And two from the officers, my Lord? 


Prior. 
Even so, noble Count. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Ost. then points to two Officers , who, with the four Soldiers , draw lots from the smallest vase directed by the Prior . 



st Sold. speaking to his comrades as the others are drawing 
This is strange mummery i' faith! but it would have been no joke, I suppose, to have offended St. Maurice. 



Prior. after examining the lots 
Soldiers, ye are free; it is your Officers who are taken. 



st Sold. as before 
Ha! the vision is dainty ? it seems; it is not vulgar blood like ours, that will serve to stain the ends of his holy lash. 

???????????????????????????????????????? A Monk having removed two of the vases, the Prior beckons the Officers to draw from the remaining one. 


Prior. 
Stand not on order; let him who is nearest put in his hand first. 



st Sold. aside to the others as the Officers are drawing 
Now by these arms! I would give a month's 

   

pay that the lot should fall on our prim, pompous lieutenant. It would be well worth the money to look in at one of their narrow windows, and see his dignified back-bone winching under the hands of a good brawny friar. 



Ost. aside, unrolling his lot 
Mighty heaven! Is fate or chance in this? 



st Off. aside to Ost.  
Have you got it, General? Change it for mine if you have. 


Ost. 
No no, my noble Albert; let us be honest; but thanks to thy generous friendship! 


Prior. 
Now shew the lots. 
All the Officers shew their lots, excepting Osterloo , who continues gloomy and thoughtful. 
Has no one drawn the sable scroll of election? 
To Osterloo  
You are silent, my Lord; of what colour is your lot? 



Ost. holding out his scroll 
Black as midnight. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Soldiers quit their ranks and crowd round Osterloo , tumultuously. 


st Sold. 
Has it fallen upon our General; 'tis a damned lot---an unfair lot. 


d Sold. 
We will not leave him behind us, though a hundred St. Maurices commanded it. 


d Sold. 
? Get within your walls again, ye cunning Friars. 


st Sold. 
A'n we should lie i' the open air all night, we will not leave brave Osterloo behind us. 



Prior. to Ost.  
Count, you seem gloomy and irresolute: have the goodness to silence these 

   

clamours. I am in truth as sorry as any of your soldiers can be, that the lot has fallen upon you. 



st Off. aside to Ost.  
Nay, my noble friend, let me fulfil this penance in your stead. It is not now a time for scruples: the soldiers will be mutinous. 


Ost. 
Mutinous! Soldiers, return to your ranks. 
Looking at them sternly as they seem unwillingly to obey 
Will you brave me so far that I must repeat my command? 
???????????????????????????????????????? They retire. 
I thank thee, dear Albert. 
To st Off.  
Thou shalt do something in my stead; but it shall not be the service thou thinkest of. 
To Prior  
Reverend Father, I am indeed somewhat struck at being marked out by fate from so many men; but, as to how I shall act thereupon, no wise irresolute. 
To the Sold.  
Continue your march. The brave Albert shall conduct you to Martigny; ? and there you will remain under his command, till I join you again. 


st Sold. 
God preserve you then, my noble General! and if you do not join us again by tomorrow evening, safe and souud, we will not leave one stone of that building standing on another. 



Many Soldiers at once. 
So swear we all! So swear, &c. 



Ost. assuming a cheerful look 
Go to, foolish Fellows! Were you to leave me in a den of lions, you could not be more apprehensive. Will watching all night by some holy 

   

shrine, or walking bare-foot through their midnight aisles, be such a hardship to one, who has passed so many nights with you all on the cold field of battle? Continue your march without delay; else these good fathers will count you no better than a band of new raised city troops, with some jolly tankard-chief for your leader. A good march to you, my friends, with kind hostesses and warm fire-sides where you are going. 


st Sold. 
Ah! What good will our fire-sides do us, wken we think how our General is lodged? 


Ost. 
? Farewell! March on as quickly as you may: you shall all drink my health to-morrow evening in a good hogshead of rhenish. 



st Sold. with others 
God grant we may! 
st to Prior  
Look to it, reverend Prior: if our General be not with us by to-morrow's sunset, St. Maurice will neither have monastery nor monks on this mountain. 


Ost. 
No more! 
Embracing first Officer, and shaking hands with others 
Farewell! Farewell! 

???????????????????????????????????????? The Soldiers , after giving him a loud cheer, march off with their Officers to martial music, and EXEUNT Osterloo, Prior , and Monks into the monastery, while the Peasants disappear amongst the rocks. Manent Morand and Agnes , who has for some time appeared, looking over a crag. 


Agn. 
Morand, Morand! 


   



Mor. 
Ha! art thou there? I might have guessed indeed, that so brave a sight would not escape thee. What made thee perch thyself like an eagle upon such a cragg as that? 


Agn. 
Chide not, good Morand, but help me down, lest I pay a dearer price for my sight than thou, with all thy grumbling, would'st wish. 

???????????????????????????????????????? He helps her down. 


Mor. 
And now thou art going no doubt to tell the Lady Leonora, what a band of gallant fellows thou hast seen. 


Agn. 
Assuredly, if I can find in my heart to speak of any but their noble leader.---What is his name? What meaning had all that drawing of lots in it? What will the monks do with ? him? Walk with me a little way towards the castle, brave Morand, and tell me what thou knowest. 


Mor. 
I should walk to the castle and miles beyond it too, ere I could answer so many questions, and I have duty in the monastery, besides. 


Agn. 
Come with me a little way, at least. 


Mor. 
Ah, Witch! thou knowest too well that I must always do what thou bidest me. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE III. 

The Refectory of the Monastery, with a small Table, on which are placed Refreshments, discovered in one Corner. Enter Osterloo , Prior , Benedict, Jerome , and Paul , &c. 



Prior. 
Noble Osterloo, let me welcome you here, as one appointed by heaven to purchase our deliverance from this dreadful malady; and I hope the price to be paid for it will not be a heavy one. Yet ere we proceed further in this matter, be entreated, I pray, to take some refreshment after your long march. 

???????????????????????????????????????? The table is placed near the front of the stage. 


Ost. 
I thank you, my Lord; this is a gentle beginning to my penance: I will, then, by your leave. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Sitting down at the table 
I have fasted long, and am indeed somewhat exhausted. 
???????????????????????????????????????? After taking some refreshment 
Ah! My poor Soldiers! You must still endure two hours' weary march, before you find such indulgence. Your wine is good, reverend Father. 


Prior. 
I am glad you find it so; it is old. 



Ost. cheerfully 
And your viands are good too; and your bread is delicious. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Drinking another cup 
I shall have vigour now for any thing.--- 

   

Pray tell me something more of this wonderful vision: was it a Saint or an Angel that appeared to the Senior Brother? 



Prior. pointing to Jerome  
He will answer for himself, and 
pointing to Paul  
? this man saw it also. 


Jer. 
It was neither Angel nor Saint, noble Count, but a mortal form wonderfully noble. 


Ost. 
And it appeared to you in the usual manner of a dream? 


Jer. 
It did; at least I know no sensible distinction. A wavy envelopement of darkness preceded it, from which appearances seemed dimly to wake into form, till all was presented before me in the full strength of reality. 


Paul. 
Nay, Brother, it broke upon me at once; a vivid distinct apparition. 


Ost. 
Well, be that as it may; what did appear to you? A mortal man, and very noble? 


Jer. 
Yes, General. Methought I was returning from mass, through the cloisters that lead from the chapel, when a figure, as I have said, appeared to me, and beckoned me to follow it. I did follow it; for at first I was neither afraid, nor even surprised; but so wonderfully it rose in stature and dignity as it strode before me, that, ere it reached the door of the stranger's burying vault, I was struck with unaccountable awe. 


Ost. 
The stranger's burying vault! 


Prior. 
? Does any sudden thought strike you, Count? 


   



Ost. 
No, no! here's your health, Fathers; 
drinking 
your wine is excellent. 


Prior. 
But that is water you have just now swallowed: this is the wine. 


Ost. 
Ha! is it? No matter, no matter! it is very good too. 

???????????????????????????????????????? A long pause; Osterloo with his eyes fixed thoughtfully on the ground. 


Prior. 
Shall not our Brother proceed with his story, General? 


Ost. 
Most certainly: I have been listening for it. 


Jer. 
Well then, as I have said, at the door of the stranger's burying vault it stopped, and beckoned me again. It entered, and I followed it. There, through the damp mouldering tombs, it strode still before me, till it came to the farther extremity, as nearly as I could guess, two yards westward from the black marble monument; and then stopping and turning on me its fixed and ghastly eyes, it stretched out its hands--- 


Ost. 
Its hands! Did you say, its hands? 


Jer. 
It stretched out one of them; the other was covered with its mantle; and in a voice ? that sounded---I know not how it sounded--- 


Paul. 
Aye, Brother; it was something like a voice, at least it conveyed words to the mind, though it was not like a voice neither. 


Jer. 
Be that as you please: these words it solemnly uttered,---"Command the Brothers of this monastery, on pain of falling victims to the pestilence now devastating the country, to stop 

   

on its way the first division of the Imperial army that shall march through your mountain pass; and chuse from it, by lot, a man who shall abide one night within these walls, to make expiation for long concealed guilt. Let the suffering be such as the nature of the crime and the connection of the expiator therewith shall dictate. This spot of earth shall reveal---" It said no more, but bent its eyes stedfastly upon me with a stern threatening frown, which became, as it looked, keener than the looks of any mortal being, and vanished from my sight. 


Paul. 
Aye, that look; that last terrible look! it awoke me with terror, and I know not how it vanished. 


Jer. 
This has been repeated to me three times; last night twice in the course of the ? night, while brother Paul here was at the same time terrified with a similar apparition. 


Prior. 
This, you will acknowledge, Count, was no common visitation, and could not but trouble us. 


Ost. 
You say well.---Yet it was but a dream. 


Prior. 
True; it was but a dream, and as such these pious men strove to consider it; when the march of your troops across our mountains, a thing so unlikely to happen, compelled them to reveal to me, without loss of time, what had appeared to them. 


Ost. 
A tall figure, you say, and of a noble aspect? 


   



Jer. 
Like that of a King, though habited more in the garb of a foreign soldier of fortune than of a state so dignified. 

 Osterloo rises from table agitated. 



Prior. 
What is the matter, General? Will you not finish your repast? 


Ost. 
I thank you; I have had enough. The night grows cold; I would rather walk than sit. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Going hastily to the bottom of the stage, and pacing to and fro. 



Jer. aside to Paul and the Prior  
What think ye of this? 



Prior. aside to Jerome  
His countenance ? changed several times as he listened to you: there is something here different from common surprise on hearing a wonderful thing. 

Enter a Peasant by the bottom of the stage, bearing a torch. 




Peas. eagerly, as he enters 
We have found it. 



Ost. stopping short in his walk 
What hast thou found? 


Peas. 
What the Prior desired us to dig for. 


Ost. 
What is that? 


Peas. 
A grave. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Osterloo turns from him suddenly, and paces up and down very rapidly. 



Prior. to Peas.  
Thou hast found it? 


Peas. 
Aye, please you, and in the very spot, near the black monument, where your reverence desired us to dig. And it is well you sent 

   

for my kinsman and I to do it, for there is not a lay-brother in the monastery strong enough to raise up the great stones that covered it. 


Prior. 
In the very spot, sayest thou? 


Peas. 
In the very spot. 


Prior. 
Bear thy torch before us, and we'll follow thee. 



Omnes. eagerly, Osterloo excepted 
Let us go immediately. 



Prior. to Osterloo , who stands fixed to the spot 
Will not Count Osterloo go also? It is fitting that he should. 



Ost. rousing himself 
O, most assuredly: I ? am perfectly ready to follow you. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


ACT II. 

SCENE I. 

---A burying Vault, almost totally dark; the Monuments and Grave-stones being seen very dimly by the Light of a single Torch, stuck by the Side of a deep open Grave, in which a Sexton is discovered, standing leaning on his Mattock, and Morand , above Ground, turning up, with his sheathed Sword, the loose Earth about the Mouth of the Grave. 



Mor. 
There is neither scull nor bone amongst this earth: the ground must have been newly broken up, when that coffin was let down into it. 


Sex. 
So one should think; but the earth here has the quality of consuming whatever is put into it in a marvellous short time. 


Mor. 
Aye; the flesh and more consumable parts of a body; but hath it grinders in its jaws, like your carnivorous animal, to cransh up bones and all? I have seen bones on an old field of battle, some hundred years after the action, lying whitened and hard in the sun. 


Sex. 
Well, a'nt be new ground, I'll warrant ye somebody has paid money enough for such a good tenement as this: I could not wish my own father a better. 


   




Mor. looking down 
The coffin is of an uncommon size: there must be a leaden one within it, I should think. 


Sex. 
I doubt that: it is only a clumsy shell that has been put together in haste; and I'll be hanged if he who made it ever made another before it. Now it would pine me with vexation ? to think I should be laid in such a bungled piece of workmanship as this. 


Mor. 
Aye; it is well for those who shall bury thee, Sexton, that thou wilt not be a looker on at thine own funeral.---Put together in haste, sayest thou! How long may it be since this coffin was laid in the ground? 


Sex. 
By my say, now, I cannot tell; though many a grave I have dug in this vault, instead of the lay-brothers, who are mighty apt to take a cholic or shortness of breath, or the like, when any thing of hard labour falls to their share. 
After pausing 
Ha, now! I have it. When I went over the mountain some ten years ago to visit my father-in-law, Baldwick, the stranger, who died the other day, after living so long as a hermit amongst the rocks, came here; and it was shrewdly suspected he had leave from our late Prior, for a good sum of money, to bury a body privately in this vault. I was a fool not to think of it before. This, I'll be sworn for it, is the place. 


   

Enter the Prior , Osterloo, Jerome, Paul, Benedict , and other Monks , with the Peasant carrying light before them. They enter by an arched door at the bottom of the stage, and walk on to the front, when every one, but Osterloo , crowds eagerly to the grave, looking down into it. 




Prior. to Sexton  
What hast thou found, friend? 


Sex. 
A coffin a'nt please you, and of a size, ? too, that might almost contain a giant. 



Omnes.  Osterloo excepted 
The inscription--- is there an inscription on it? 


Sex. 
No, no! They who put these planks together had no time for inscriptions. 



Omnes. as before 
Break it open:---break it open. 

???????????????????????????????????????? They crowd more eagerly about the grave, when, after a pause, the Sexton is heard wrenching open the lid of the coffin. 



Omnes. as before 
What is there in it? What hast thou found, Sexton? 


Sex. 
An entire skeleton, and of no common size. 



Ost. in a quick hollow voice 
Is it entire? 



Sex. after a pause 
No, the right hand is wanting, and there is not a loose bone in the coffin. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Ost. shudders and steps back. 



Jer. to Prior , after a pause 
Will you not speak to him, Father? His countenance is changed, and his whole frame seems moved by some sudden convulsion. 

   

The Prior remains silent 

How is this? You are also changed, reverend Father. Shall I speak to him? 


Prior. 
Speak thou to him. 



Jer. to Osterloo  
What is the matter with you, General? Has some sudden malady seized you? 



Ost. to Jerome  
? Let me be alone with you, holy Prior; let me be alone with you instantly. 



Jer. pointing 
This is the Prior.---He would be alone with you, Father: he would make his confession to you. 


Prior. 
I dare not hear him alone: there must be witnesses. Let him come with me to my apartment. 



Jer. to Osterloo , as they leave the grave 
Let me conduct you, Count. 
After walking from it some paces 

Come on, my Lord, why do you stop short? 


Ost. 
Not this way---not this way, I pray you. 


Jer. 
What is it you would avoid? 


Ost. 
Turn aside, I pray you; I cannot cross over this. 


Jer. 
Is it the grave you mean? We have left it behind us. 


Ost. 
Is it not there? It yawns across our path, directly before us. 


Je. 
Indeed, my Lord, it is some paces behind. 


Ost. 
There is delusion in my sight then; lead me as thou wilt. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


SCENE II. 

The private Apartment of the Prior ; enter Benedict , looking round as he enters. 



Ben. 
Not yet come; aye, penitence is not very swift of foot. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Speaking to himself as he walks up and down 
Miserable man!---brave, goodly creature!--- but alas, alas! most subdued; most miserable; and, I fear, most guilty! 
Enter Jerome . 

Jerome here!---Dost thou know, Brother, that the Prior is coming here immediately to confess the penitent? 


Jer. 
Yes, Brother; but I am no intruder; for he has summoned me to attend the confession as well as thyself. 


Ben. 
Methinks some other person of our order, unconcerned with the dreaming part of this business, would have been a less suspicious witness. 


Jer. 
Suspicious! Am I more concerned in this than any other member of our community? Heaven appoints its own agents as it listeth: the stones of these walls might have declared its awful will as well as the dreams of a poor friar. 


Ben. 
True, brother Jerome; could they listen to confessions as he does, and hold reveries upon them afterwards. 


   



Jer. 
What dost thou mean with thy reveries ? and confessions? Did not Paul see the terrible vision as well as I? 


Ben. 
If thou hadst not revealed thy dream to him, he would have slept sound enough, or, at worst, have but flown over the pinnacles with his old mate the horned serpent, as usual: and had the hermit Baldwick never made his deathbed confession to thee, thou wouldst never have had such a dream to reveal. 


Jer. 
Thinkest thou so? Then what brought Osterloo and his troops so unexpectedly by this route? With all thy heretical dislike to miraculous interposition, how wilt thou account for this? 


Ben. 
If thou hadst no secret intelligence of Osterloo's route, to set thy fancy a working on the story the hermit confessed to thee, I never wore cowl on my head. 


Jer. 
Those, indeed, who hear thee speak so lightly of mysterious and holy things, will scarcely believe thou ever didst.---But hush! the Prior comes with his penitent; let us have no altercation now. 

Enter Prior and Osterloo . 




Prior. after a pause, in which he seems agitated 
Now, Count Osterloo, we are ready to hear your confession. To myself and these pious ? Monks; men appointed by our holy religion to search into the crimes of the penitent, unburthen 

   

your heart of its terrible secret; and God grant you afterwards, if it be his righteous will, repentance and mercy. 



Ost. making a sign, as if unable to speak, then uttering rapidly 
Presently, presently. 


Jer. 
Don't hurry him, reverend Father; he cannot speak. 


Ben. 
Take breath awhile, noble Osterloo, and speak to us when you can. 


Ost. 
I thank you. 


Ben. 
He is much agitated. 
To Osterloo  
Lean upon me, my Lord. 



Prior. to Benedict  
Nay, you exceed in this. 
To Osterloo  
Recollect yourself, General, and try to be more composed. You seem better now; endeavour to unburden your mind of its fatal secret; to have it labouring within your breast is protracting a state of misery. 



Ost. feebly 
I have voice now. 



Jer. to Osterloo  
Give to Heaven then, as you ought--- 


Ben. 
Hush, brother Jerome! no exhortations now! let him speak it as he can. 
To Osterloo  
We attend to you most anxiously. 



Ost. after struggling for utterance 
? I slew him. 


Prior. 
The man whose bones have now been discovered? 


Ost. 
The same: I slew him. 


Jer. 
In the field, Count? 


Ost. 
No, no! many a man's blood has been on my hands there:---this is on my heart. 


   



Prior. 
It is then premeditated murder you have committed. 



Ost. hastily 
Call it so, call it so. 



Jer. to Osterloo , after a pause 
And is this all? Will you not proceed to tell us the circumstances attending it? 


Ost. 
Oh! they were terrible!---But they are all in my mind as the indistinct horrors of a frenzied imagination. 
After a short pause 

I did it in a narrow pass on St. Gothard, in the stormy twilight of a winter day. 


Prior. 
You murdered him there? 


Ost. 
I felt him dead under my grasp; but I looked at him no more after the last desperate thrust that I gave him. I hurried to a distance from the spot: when a servant, who was with me, seized with a sudden remorse, begged leave to return and remove the body, that, if possible, ? he might bury it in consecrated ground, as an atonement for the part he had taken in the terrible deed.---I gave him leave, with means to procure his desire:---I waited for him three days, concealed in the mountains;---but I neither saw him, nor heard of him again. 


Ben. 
But what tempted a brave man like Osterloo to commit such a horrible act? 


Ost. 
The torments of jealousy stung me to it, 
Hiding his face with his hands and then uncovering it 
I loved her, and was beloved:--- He came,---a noble stranger--- 


Jer. 
Aye, if he was in his mortal state, as I 

   

in my dream beheld him, he was indeed most noble. 



Ost. waving his hand impatiently 
Well, well! he did come, then, and she loved me no more.---With arts and enchantments he besotted her.---Even from her own lips I received--- 
???????????????????????????????????????? Tossing up his arms violently, and then covering his face as before 
But what is all this to you? Maimed as he was, having lost his right arm in a battle with the Turks, I could not defy him to the field.--- ---After passing two nights in all the tossing agony of a damned spirit, I followed him on his journey 'cross the mountains.---On the ? twilight of the second day, I laid wait for him in a narrow pass; and as soon as his gigantic form darkened the path before me---I have told you all. 



Prior. eagerly 
You have not told his name. 


Ost. 
Did I not say Montera? He was a noble Hungarian. 



Prior. much agitated 
He was so!---He was so. He was noble and beloved. 



Jer. aside to Prior  
What is the matter with you, reverend Father? Was he your Friend? 



Prior. aside to Jerome  
Speak not to me now, but question the murderer as ye will. 



Ben. overhearing the Prior  
He is indeed a murderer, reverend Father, but he is our penitent. 


   



Prior. 
Go to! what are names?---Ask him what questions you will, and finish the confession quickly. 



Ben. to Osterloo  
But have you never till now confessed this crime; nor in the course of so many years reflected on its dreadful turpitude? 


Ost. 
The active and adventurous life of a soldier is most adverse to reflection: but often, in the stillness of midnight, the remembrance of ? this terrible deed has come powerfully upon me; till morning returned, and the noise of the camp began, and the fortunes of the day were before me. 



Prior. in a severe voice 
Thou hast indeed been too long permitted to remain in this hardened state. But heaven, sooner or later, will visit the man of blood with its terrours. Sooner or later, he shall feel that he stands upon an awful brink; and short is the step which engulphs him in that world, where the murdered and the murderer meet again, in the tremendous presence of him, who is the Lord and giver of life. 


Ost. 
You believe then in such severe retribution? 


Prior. 
I believe in it as in my own existence. 



Ost. turning to Jerome and Benedict  
And you, good Fathers, you believe in this? 


Ben. 
Nature teaches this as well as revelation: we must believe it. 


Jer. 
Some presumptuous minds, dazzled with 

   

the sunshine of prosperity, have dared to doubt; but to us, in the sober shade of life; visited too, as we have now been, by visions preternatural and awful, it is a thing of certainty, rather than of faith. 


Ost. 
That such things are!---It makes the ? brain confused and giddy.---These are tremendous thoughts. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Leans his back against the wall, and gazes fixedly on the ground. 


Prior. 
Let us leave him to the bitterness of his thoughts. We now must deliberate with the brethren on what is to be done. There must be no delay: the night advances fast. Conduct him to another apartment: I must assemble a council of the whole order. 



Jer. to Osterloo  
We must lead you to another apartment, Count, while we consider what is to be done. 



Ost. roused 
Aye, the expiation you mean: let it be severe; if atonement in this world may be made. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Turning to Prior as Jerome leads him off 
Let your expiation be severe, holy Father: a slight penance matches not with such a crime as mine. 


Prior. 
Be well assured it shall be what it ought. 



Ost. turning again and catching hold of the Prior 's robe 
I regard not bodily pain. In battle once, with the head of a broken arrow in my thigh, I led on the charge, and sustained all 

   

the exertions of a well-fought field, till night closed upon our victory. Let your penance be severe, my reverend Father; I have been long ? acquainted with pain. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Exeunt Osterloo and Jerome . 


Ben. 
You seem greatly moved, Father; but it is not with pity for the wretched. You would not destroy such a man as this, though his crime is the crime of blood? 


Prior. 
He shall die: ere another sun dawn on these walls, he shall die. 


Ben. 
Oh, say not so! Think of some other expiation. 


Prior. 
I would think of another, were there any other more dreadful to him than death. 


Ben. 
He is your penitent. 


Prior. 
He is the murderer of my brother. 


Ben. 
Then Heaven have mercy on him, if he must find none here!--- Montero was your brother? 


Prior. 
My only brother. It were tedious to tell thee now, how I was separated from him after the happy days of our youth.--- I saw him no more; yet he was still the dearest object of my thoughts. After escaping death in many a battle, he was slain, as it was conjectured, by banditti, in travelling across the mountains. His body was never discovered. Ah! little did I think it was lying so near me! 


Ben. 
? It is indeed piteous; and you must needs feel it as a brother: but consider the danger we run, should we lay violent hands on 

   

an Imperial General, with his enraged soldiers, within a few hours' march of our walls. 


Prior. 
I can think of nothing but revenge. Speak to me no more. I must assemble the whole order immediately. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 

SCENE III. 

Another Apartment: Enter Osterloo as from a small Recess at the bottom of the Stage, pacing backwards and forwards several times in an agitated Manner; then advancing slowly to the front, where he stands musing and muttering to himself for some Moments, before he speaks aloud. 



Ost. 
That this smothered horror should burst upon me at last! And there be really such things as the darkened fancy imageth to itself, when the busy day is stilled.---An unseen world surrounds us: spirits and powers, and the invisible dead hover near us; while we in unconscious security---Oh! I have slept upon a fearful brink! Every sword that threatened my head in battle, had power in its edge to send me to a terrible account.---I have slept upon a fearful brink.---Am I truly awake? 
Rubbing his eyes, then grasping several parts of his body, first with one hand and then with the other 
Yes, yes! it is so!---I am keenly and terribly awake. 

   


???????????????????????????????????????? Paces rapidly up and down, and then stopping short. 
Can there be virtue in penances suffered by the body to do away offences of the soul? If there be---O if there be! let them runnel my body with stripes; and swaith me round in one continued girth of wounds! Any thing, that can be endured here, is mercy compared to the dreadful abiding of what may be hereafter. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Wovelreid , behind followed by Soldiers , who range themselves at the bottom of the stage. Osterloo turning round, runs up to him eagerly. 
Ha! my dear Albert, returned to me again, with all my noble fellows at thy back!--- ---Pardon me; I mistook you for one of ? my Captains. 


Wov. 
I am the Prior's Captain. 


Ost. 
And those men too? 


Wov. 
They are the Prior's Soldiers, who have been ordered from distant quarters to repair to the monastery immediately. 


Ost. 
In such haste? 


Wov. 
Aye, in truth! We received our orders after sun-set, and have marched two good leagues since. 


Ost. 
What may this mean? 


Wov. 
Faith I know not. My duty is to obey the Prior, and pray to our good saint; and whether I am commanded to surprise the 

   

strong hold of an enemy, or protect an execution, it is the same thing to me. 


Ost. 
An execution! can ought of this nature be intended? 


Wov. 
You turn pale, Sir: wearing the garb of a soldier, you have surely seen blood ere now. 


Ost. 
I have seen too much blood. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Prior , Jerome, Paul , and Monks , walking in order; the Prior holding a paper in his hand. 



Prior. with solemnity 
Count Osterloo, Lieutenant-General of our liege Lord the Emperor; authorized by this deed, which is subscribed by all the brethren of our Holy Order here present, ? I pronounce to you our solemn decision, that the crime of murder, as, by the mysterious voice of heaven, and your own confession, your crime is proved to be, can only be expiated by death: you are therefore warned to prepare yourself to die this night. Before day-break, you must be with the inhabitants of another world; where may the great Maker of us all deal with you in mercy! 

????????????????????????????????????????  Osterloo staggers back from the spot where he stood, and remains silent. 


Prior. 
It is a sentence, Count, pronounced against you from necessity, to save the lives of our whole community, which you yourself have promised to submit to; have you any thing to say in reply to it? 


   



Ost. 
Nothing: my thoughts are gone from me in the darkness of astonishment. 


Prior. 
We are compelled to be thus hasty and severe: ere day-break, you must die. 


Ost. 
Ere day-break! not even the light of another sun, to one so ill prepared for the awful and tremendous state into which you would thrust him! this is inhuman! it is horrible! 


Prior. 
He was as ill prepared for it, who, with still shorter warning, was thrust into that awful state in the narrow pass of St. Gothard. 


Ost. 
? The guilt of murder was not on his soul. ---Nay, nay, holy Prior! consider this horrible extremity: let the pain of the executioner's stroke be twenty fold upon me; but thrust me not forth to that state from which my soul recoils with unutterable horror.--- ---Never but once, to save the life of a friend, did I bend the knee to mortal man in humble supplication. I am a Soldier; in many battles I have bled for the service of my country; I am a noble Soldier, and I was a proud one; yet do I thus---Contemn not my extremity! my knee is on the ground. 


Prior. 
Urge me no further. It must not be; no respite can be granted. 



Ost. starting up furiously from the ground, and drawing his sword 
Then subdue as you may, stern Priest, the strength of a desperate man. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Wovelreid and Soldiers rush forward, getting 

   

behind him, and surrounding him on every side, and after a violent struggle disarm him. 


Wov. 
What a noble fellow this would be to defend a narrow breach, though he shrinks with such abhorrence from a scaffold. It is a piteous thing to see him so beset. 



Prior. to Wovelreid  
What sayest thou, Fool! 


Wov. 
Nay it is no business of mine, my Lord, I confess. Shall we conduct him to the prison chamber? 


Prior. 
? Do so; and see that he retain no concealed arms about him. 


Wov. 
I obey, my Lord: every thing shall be made secure. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Exit Osterloo , guarded by Wovelreid and Soldiers , and, at the same time, enter Benedict , by the opposite side, who stands looking after him piteously. 



Prior. sternly to Benedict  
What brings thee here? Dost thou repent having refused to concur with us in an act that preserves the community? 


Ben. 
Say rather, reverend Father, an act that revenges your brother's death, which the laws of the empire should revenge. 


Prior. 
A supernatural visitation of heaven hath commanded us to punish it.--- What; dost thou shake thy head? Thou art of a doubting and dangerous spirit; and beware lest, sooner or later, the tempter do not lure thee into heresy. If reason cannot subdue 

   

thee, authority shall.---Return again to thy cell; let me hear of this no more. 


Ben. 
I will, reverend Father. But for the love of our holy saint, bethink you, ere it be too late, that though we may be saved from the pestilence by this bloody sacrifice, what will rescue our throats from the swords of Osterloo's soldiers, when they shall return, as they have threatened, to demand from us their General? 


Prior. 
? Give thyself no concern about this. My own bands are already called in, and a messenger has been dispatched to the Abbess Matilda; her troops, in defence of the church, will face the best soldiers of the empire.--- But why lose we time in unprofitable contentions? Go, my Sons, 
speaking to other Monks  
the night advances fast, and we have much to do ere morning. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Knocking heard without. 
Ha! who knocks at this untimely hour? Can the soldiers be indeed returned upon us?--- Run to the gate; but open it to none. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Exeunt several Monks in haste, and presently re-enter with a lay-brother. 


Lay-B. 
Please ye, reverend Father; the Marchioness has sent a messenger from the castle, beseeching you to send a Confessor immediately to confess one of her women, who was taken ill yesterday, and is now at the point of death. 


Prior. 
I'm glad it is only this.--- 
What is the matter with the penitent? 

   



Lay-B. 
I know not, please you: the messenger only said, she was taken ill yesterday. 



Prior. shaking his head 
Aye, this malady has got there also.---I cannot send one of the Brothers to bring infection immediately ? amongst us.---What is to be done? Leonora is a most noble Lady; and the family have been great benefactors to our order.---I must send somebody to her. But he must stop well his nostrils with spicery, and leave his upper garment behind him, when he quits the infected apartment. Jerome, wilt thou go? Thou art the favorite Confessor with all the women at the castle. 


Jer. 
Nay, Father; I must attend on our prisoner here, who has most need of ghostly assistance. 



Prior. to another Monk  
Go thou, Anselmo; thou hast given comfort to many a dying penitent. 


Monk. 
I thank you, Father, for the preference; but Paul is the best of us all for administering comfort to the dying; and there is a sickness come over my heart, o'the sudden, that makes me unfit for the office. 



Prior. to Paul  
Thou wilt go then, my good Son. 


Paul. 
I beseech you, don't send me, reverend Father; I ne'er escaped contagion in my life, where malady or fever were to be had. 


Prior. 
Who will go then? 

???????????????????????????????????????? A deep silence. 


   



Ben. 
? What; has no one faith enough in the protection of St. Maurice, even purchased, as it is about to be, by the shedding of human blood, to venture upon this dangerous duty? I will go then, Father, though I am sometimes of a doubting spirit. 


Prior. 
Go, and St. Maurice protect thee! 
???????????????????????????????????????? Exit Ben. 
Let him go; it is well that we get rid of him for the night, should they happily detain him so long at the castle.---He is a troublesome, close-searching, self-willed fellow. He hath no zeal for the order. Were a miser to bequeath his possessions to our monastery, he would assist the disappointed heir himself to find out a flaw in the deed.---But retire to your cells, my Sons; and employ yourselves in prayer and devotion, till the great bell warn you to attend the execution. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 

SCENE III. 

An Apartment in the Castle; Enter Leonora and Agnes , speaking as they enter. 



Ag. 
But she is asleep now; and is so much and so suddenly better, that the Confessor, when he comes, will be dissatisfied, I fear, that we have called him from his cell at such an unreasonable hour. 


Leo. 
Let him come, nevertheless; don't send to prevent him. 


   



Ag. 
He will be unwilling to be detained, for they are engaged in no common matters tonight at the monastery. Count Osterloo, as I told you before, is doing voluntary penance at the shrine of St. Maurice to stop the progress of this terrible malady. 


Leo. 
I remember thou did'st. 


Ag. 
Ah, Marchioness! you would not say so thus faintly, had you seen him march through the pass with his soldiers. He is the bravest and most graceful man, though somewhat advanced in years, that I ever beheld.---Ah, had you but seen him! 


Leo. 
I have seen him, Agnes. 


Ag. 
And I spoke of him all the while, yet you did not tell me this before! Ah, my noble Mistress and Friend! the complexion of your ? cheek is altered; you have indeed seen him, and you have not seen him with indifference. 


Leo. 
Think as thou wilt about this. He was the friend and fellow-soldier of my Lord, when we first married; though before my marriage I had never seen him. 


Ag. 
Friend! Your Lord was then in the decline of life; there must have been great disparity in their friendship. 


Leo. 
They were friends, however; for the Marquis liked society younger than himself; and I, who had been hurried into an unequal marriage, before I could judge for myself, was sometimes foolish enough to compare them together. 


   



Ag. 
Aye, that was natural enough. 
Eagerly 
And what happened then? 



Leo. offended 
What happened then! 
drawing herself up proudly. 
Nothing happened then, but subduing the foolish fancy of a girl, which was afterwards amply repaid by the self-approbation and dignity of a woman. 


Ag. 
Pardon me, Madam; I ought to have supposed all this. But you have been long a widow, and Osterloo is still unmarried; what prevented you when free. 


Leo. 
? I was ignorant what the real state of his sentiments had been in regard to me. But had this been otherwise; received, as I was, into the family of my Lord, the undowried daughter of a petty nobleman; and left as I now am, by his confiding love, the sole guardian of his children and their fortunes; I could never think of supporting a second lord on the wealth entrusted to me by the first, to the injury of his children. As nothing, therefore, has ever happened in consequence of this weakness of my youth, nothing ever shall. 


Ag. 
This is noble. 


Leo. 
It is right.---But here comes the father Confessor. 
Enter Benedict . 

You are welcome, good Father! yet I am almost ashamed to see you; for our sick person has become suddenly well again, and is now in a deep sleep. I fear I shall appear to you capricious 

   

and inconsiderate in calling you up at so late an hour. 


Ben. 
Be not uneasy, Lady, upon this account: I am glad to have an occasion for being absent from the monastery for some hours, if you will permit me to remain here so long. 


Leo. 
? What mean you, Father Benedict? Your countenance is solemn and sorrowful: what is going on at the monastery? 
He shakes his head. 
Ha! will they be severe with him in a voluntary penance, submitted to for the good of the order?---What is the nature of the penance? It is to continue, I am told, but one night. 


Ben. 
It will, indeed, soon be over. 


Leo. 
And will he be gone on the morrow? 


Ben. 
His spirit will, but his body remains with us for ever. 



Leo. uttering a shriek 
Death, dost thou mean?---O horror! horror! Is this the expiation? Oh most horrible, most unjust! 


Ben. 
Indeed I consider it as such. Though guilty, by his own confession, of murder, committed, many year's since, under the frenzy of passion; it belongs not to us to inflict the punishment of death upon a guilty soul, taken so suddenly and unprepared for its doom. 


Leo. 
Murder! didst thou say murder? Oh Osterloo, Osterloo! hast thou been so barbarous? and art thou in this terrible state?---Must thou thus end thy days, and so near me too! 


Ben. 
? You seem greatly moved, noble Leonora: 

   

would you could do something more for him than lament. 



Leo. catching hold of him eagerly 
Can I do any thing? Speak, Father: O tell me how! I will do any thing and every thing.--- Alas, alas! my vassals are but few, and cannot be assembled immediately. 


Ben. 
Force were useless. Your vassals, if they were assembled, would not be persuaded to attack the sacred walls of a monastery. 


Leo. 
I did indeed rave foolishly: but what else can be done?---Take these jewels and every thing of value in the castle, if they will bribe those who guard him, to let him escape.--- Think of it.---O think well of it, good Benedict! 


Ag. 
I have heard that there is a secret passage, leading from the prison-chamber of the monastery under its walls, and opening to the free country at the bottom of the rocks. 


Ben. 
By every holy saint, so there is! and the most sordid of our brothers is entrusted with the key of it. But who will be his conductor? None but a Monk of the Order may pass the soldiers who guard him; and the Monk who should do it, must fly from his country for ? ever, and break his sacred vows. I can oppose the weak fears and injustice of my brethren, for misfortunes and disgust of the world, not superstitious veneration for monastic sanctity, has covered my head with a cowl; but this I cannot do. 


   



Ag. 
There is the dress of a Monk of your Order in the old wardrobe of the castle, if some person were disguised in it. 


Leo. 
Thanks to thee! thanks to thee, my happy Agnes! I will be that person.---I will put on the disguise.---Good Father! your face gives consent to this. 


Ben. 
If there be time; but I left them preparing for the execution. 


Leo. 
There is, there is!---Come with me to the wardrobe, and we'll set out for the monastery forthwith.---Come, come! a few moments will carry us there. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Exit , hastily, followed by Ag. and Ben.  

SCENE IV. 

A wood near the Castle; the Stage quite dark: Enter Two Servants with Torches. 



st Ser. 
This must surely be the entry to the path, where my Lady ordered us to wait for those same Monks. 


d Ser. 
Yes; I know it well, for yonder is the postern. It is the nearest path to the monastery, but narrow and difficult. The night is cold: I hope they will not keep us long waiting. 


st Ser. 
I heard the sound of travellers coming up the eastern avenue, and they may linger belike; for Monks are marvellously fond of great people and of strangers; at least the good Fathers of our monastery are. 


   



d Ser. 
Aye, in their late Prior's time they lived like lords themselves; and they are not very humble at present.---But there's light from the postern: here they come. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Enter Benedict, Leonora disguised like a Monk , and Agnes with a Peasant's cloak thrown over her. 



Leo. speaking as she enters 
It is well thought of, good Benedict. Go thou before me to gain brother Baldwin, in the first place; and I'll wait without on the spot we have agreed upon, until I hear the signal. 


Ben. 
Thou comprehendest me compleatly, Brother; so God speed us both! 
To st Ser.  

Torch-man, go thou with me. This is the right ? path, I trust? 


st Ser. 
Fear not, Father; I know it well. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Exit Ben. and st Ser.  



Leo. to Agnes , while she waves her hand to d Servant to retire to a greater distance. 
After I am admitted to the monastery, fail not to wait for me at the mouth of the secret passage. 


Ag. 
Fear not: Benedict has described it so minutely, I cannot fail to discover it. 


Leo. 
What steps are those behind us? Somebody following us from the castle? 

Enter d Servant in haste. 



d Ser. 
There are travellers arrived at the gate, and desire to be admitted for the night. 


   



Leo. 
In an evil hour they come. Return, dear Agnes, and receive them. Benighted strangers, no doubt. Excuse my absence any how: go quickly. 


Ag. 
And leave you to proceed alone? 


Leo. 
Care not for me: there is an energy within me now, that bids defiance to fear. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Beckons to d Servant who goes out before her with the torch, and EXIT . 



Ag. muttering to herself, as she turns to the castle 
The evil spirit hath brought travellers to us at this moment: but I'll send them to their chambers right quickly, and join her at the secret passage, notwithstanding. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Exeunt. 


   


ACT III. 

SCENE I. 

---The Prison-chamber of the Monastery: Osterloo is discovered, sitting in a bending Posture, with his clenched Hands pressed upon his Knees and his Eyes fixed on the Ground, Jerome standing by him. 



Jer. 
Nay , sink not thus, my Son; the mercy of Heaven is infinite. Let other thoughts enter thy soul: let penitence and devotion subdue it. 


Ost. 
Nothing but one short moment of division between this state of humanity and that which is to follow! The executioner lets fall his axe, and the dark veil is rent; the gulf is uncovered; the regions of anguish are before me. 


Jer. 
My Son, my Son! this must not be; thine imagination overpowers thy devotion. 


Ost. 
The dead are there; and what welcome shall the murderer receive from that assembled host? Oh the terrible form that stalks forth to meet me! the stretching out of that hand! the greeting of that horrible smile! And it is thou, who must lead me before the tremendous majesty of my offended Maker! Incomprehensible and dreadful! What thoughts can give an image of that which overpowers all thought! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Clasping his hands tightly over his head, and bending himself almost to the ground. 


   




Jer. after a pause 
Art thou entranced? art thou asleep? art thou still in those inward agonies of imagination? 
Touching him softly 
Speak to me. 



Ost. starting up 
? Are they come for me? They shall not yet: I'll strangle the first man that lays hold of me. 
Grasping Jerome by the throat. 


Jer. 
Let go your hold, my Lord; I did but touch you gently to rouse you from your stupor. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Osterloo lets go his hold, and Jerome shrinks to a distance. 


Ost. 
I have grasped thee, then, too roughly. But shrink not from me thus. Strong men have fallen by my arm, but a child might contend with me now. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Throwing himself back again into his chair, and bursting into tears. 


Jer. 
Forgive me, my Son, there was a wildness in your eyes that made me afraid. 


Ost. 
Thou need'st not be afraid: thou art a good man, and hast days of life still before thee; thou need'st not be afraid.--- But, as thou art a good man, speak to me, I conjure thee, as a man, not as a Monk: answer me as the true sense and reason of a man doth convince thee. 


Jer. 
I will, my Son. 


Ost. 
Dost thou in truth believe, that the very instant after life has left the body, we are forthwith awake and conscious in the world of spirits? No intermediate state of slumbering insensibility between? 


   



Jer. 
It is indeed my belief. Death is but a ? short though awful pass; as it were a winking of the eyes for a moment. We shut them in this world and open them in the next: and there we open them with such increased vividness of existence, that this life, in comparison, will appear but as a state of slumber and of dreams. ---But wherefore dost thou cross thine arms so closely on thy breast, and coil thyself together so wretchedly? What is the matter, my Son? Art thou in bodily anguish? 


Ost. 
The chilly night shoots icy coldness through me. 


Jer. 
O regard not the poor feelings of a fleshly frame, which thou so soon must part withal: a little time will now put an end to every thing that nature can endure. 



Ost. raising his head quickly 
Ha! how soon? Has the bell struck again since I listened to it last? 


Jer. 
No; but it will soon strike, and daybreak is at hand. Rouse ye then, and occupy the few minutes that remain in acts of devotion becoming thine unhappy state. O, my Son, pour out thy soul in penitent prayers to an offended but merciful God. We, too, will pray for thee. Months, nay years after thy death, ? masses shall be said for the repose of thy soul, that it may at last be received into bliss. O my unhappy Son! pour forth thy spirit to God; and let thy prayers also ascend to our blessed Saint and Martyr, who will intercede for thee. 


   



Ost. 
I cannot: I have not thoughts for prayer. ---The gulf yawns before me---the unknown, the unbounded, the unfathomable!---Prayers! prayers! what prayers hath despair? 


Jer. 
Hold, hold, refractory Spirit! This obstinacy is destruction.---I must call in brother Bernard to assist me: I cannot be answerable alone, in a service of such infinite moment. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Exit ; and after a pause, in which Osterloo seems absorbed in the stupor of despair, enter Leonora disguised. 



Leo. coming eagerly forward, and then stopping short to look at him 
There is some mistake in this: it is not Osterloo. ---It is, it is! but Oh, how changed! Thy hand, great God! has been upon him. 
Going closer to him 

Osterloo; Osterloo. 


Ost. 
I hear thee, Father. 



Leo. throwing aside her disguise 
O no! it is no Father. Lift up thine eyes and see an old friend before thee, with deliverance in her hand. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Holding out a key. 



Ost. looking up wildly 
Is it a sound in my ears, or did any one say deliverance? 
Gazing on her 

? What thing art thou? A form of magic or delusion? 


   



Leo. 
Neither, Count Osterloo; but an old friend, bringing this key in her hand for thy deliverance. Yet much I fear thou hast not strength enough to rise and follow me. 



Ost. bounding from his seat 
I have strength for any thing if there be deliverance in it.--- Where go we? They will be upon us immediately. 



Leo. lifting a small lamp from a table, and holding it to examine the opposite wall 
The door, as he described it, is to the right of a small projection of the wall.---Here---here it is! 
Opens a small door, and beckons Osterloo to follow her. 


Ost. 
Yes, blessed being! I will follow thee. ---Ha! they are coming! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Strides hastily to the door, while Leonora holds up the lamp to light him in to it, and then going in herself, shuts the door softly behind her. 

SCENE II. 

An old ruinous Vault, with a strong grated Door on one Side, through which the Moon-beams are gleaming: on the other Side, an old winding Staircase, leading from the upper Regions of the Monastery, from which a feeble Light is seen, increasing by degrees; and presently Leonora appears, descending the Stairs with a Lamp in her Hand, followed by Osterloo . 

   

As she enters, something on the Wall catches her Robe, and she turns round to disentangle it, bending her Face close to the Light. 




Ost. stopping to assist her, and then gazing on her 
Thou art something I have known and loved somewhere, though it has passed away from my mind with all my better thoughts.--- Great power of Heaven! art thou Leonora? 



Leo. smiling 
Dost thou know me now? 


Ost. 
I do, I do! My heart knew thee before, but my memory did not. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Kneeling and kissing both her hands 
And so it is to thee---thou whom I first loved--- Pardon me, pardon me!---thou whom I loved and dared not love;---thou from whom I fled to be virtuous---thou art my deliverer. Oh! had I never loved another after thee, it had been well.---Knowest thou it is a murderer thou art saving? 


Leo. 
Say no more of this: I know thy story, and I came--- 


Ost. 
O! thou camest like a blessed Spirit to deliver me from many horrors. I was terribly beset: thou hast snatched me from a tremendous brink. 


Leo. 
I hope so, if this key prove to be the right one. 



Ost. alarmed 
Dost thou doubt it? 


Leo. 
It seems to me smaller than it ought to ? be, when I consider that massive door. 


   



Ost. 
Give it me. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Snatches the key from her, and runs to the door; then turns the key in the lock, and finding it too small, stamps with his feet, throws it from him, and holds up his clenched hands in despair. 


Leo. 
Oh, cross fate! But I'll return again for the right one. Baldwin cannot be so wicked as to deceive me, and Benedict is still on the watch, near the door of the prison-chamber. Stay here till I return. 

???????????????????????????????????????? She ascends the stairs, whilst Osterloo leans his back to the wall, frequently moving his body up and down with impatient agitation: a bell tolls; Osterloo starts from his place, and Leonora descends again, re-entering in great alarm. 


Leo. 
Oh! I cannot go now: that bell tolls to warn them to the great hall: I shall meet them on their way. What is to be done? The strength of three men could not force that heavy door, and thou art feeble and spent. 



Ost. running furiously to the door 
Despair has strength for any thing. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Seizes hold of the door, and, making two or three terrible efforts, bursts it open with a loud jar. 


Leo. 
Supernatural strength has assisted thee: now thou art free. 

???????????????????????????????????????? As Osterloo and Leonora are about to pass on through the door, Wovelreid and three 

   

armed Soldiers appear in the porch beyond it, and oppose their passage. 


Wov. 
Hold! we are the Prior's Soldiers, and will suffer no prisoner to escape. 


Ost. 
Those who dare prevent me! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Wrests a sword from one of the Soldiers , and, fighting furiously, forces his way past them all, they not daring to pursue him; when Wovelreid seizing on Leonora to prevent her from following him, she calls out. 


Leo. 
O let me pass! and I'll reward you nobly. 



Ost. returning to rescue Leo . 
Let go thine unhallowed grasp. 


Leo. 
For Heaven's sake care not for me! Save thyself---save thyself! I am in no danger. Turn not again to fight, when such terrible odds are against thee. 


Ost. 
? I have arms in my hand now, and my foes are before me! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Fights fiercely again, till Morand , with a strong band of Soldiers , entering the porch behind him, he is overpowered and secured; Leonora sinks down by the wall in a swoon. 


Wov. 
Give me a rope. We must bind him securely; for the Devil has put the strength of ten men into him, though, but half an hour ago, his face was as pale as a moon-light icicle, and he could scarcely walk without being supported. 


   



Mor. 
Alas, alas! his face has returned to its former colour; his head sinks on his breast, and his limbs are again feeble and listless. I would rather see him fighting like a fiend than see him thus. 


Wov. 
Let us move him hence; would'st thou stop to lament over him? 


Mor. 
It was base work in Baldwin to betray their plot to the Prior, for he took their money first I'll be sworn. 


Wov. 
He had betrayed the Prior then, and all the community besides. 


Mor. 
Well, let us move him hence: this is no business of ours. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Exeunt Morand, Wovelreid and Soldiers , leading out Osterloo . 
Enter Agnes by the grated door, and discovers Leonora on the ground. 



Ag. 
O holy Virgin! On the ground, fainting and ill! Have the barbarians left her thus? 
???????????????????????????????????????? Chafing her temples and hand 
She begins to revive. It is me, my dearest Lady: look up and see me: those men are all ? gone. 


Leo. 
And Osterloo with them? 


Ag. 
Alas, he is. 


Leo. 
It is fated so. Let me lie where I am: I cannot move yet, my good Agnes. 


Ag. 
Nay, do not yet despair of saving the Count. 


   




Leo. starting up and catching hold of her eagerly 
How so? Is it possible? 


Ag. 
The travellers, arrived at the castle, are the Imperial Ambassador and his train. Night overtook them on the mountains, and they are now making merry in the hall. 


Leo. 
Thank Heaven for this! Providence has sent him hither. I'll go to him instantly, and conjure him to interpose his authority to save the life of Osterloo. Representing his liege Lord, the Emperor, the Prior dare not disobey his commands, and the gates of the monastery will be opened at his call. Who comes here? Let us go. 

Re-enter Morand . 




Mor. to Leonora  
You are revived again: I am glad to see it. Pardon me, Lady, that I forgot you in your extremity, and let me conduct you safely to the castle. 


Leo. 
I thank you; but my servants are without. ? Let me go. Don't follow me, I pray you. 


Mor. 
Let me support you through the porch, and I'll leave you to their care, since you desire it. 

????????????????????????????????????????  Exeunt , Leonora supported by Morand and Agnes . 


   


SCENE III. 

A grand Hall, prepared for the Execution; Soldiers are discovered drawn up on each Side of the Scaffold, with Benedict and several of the Monks on the front of the Stage. A bell tolls at measured Intervals, with a deep pause between; after which enter Morand , hanging his Head sorrowfully. 




Ben. to Mor.  
Is he come forth? 


st Monk. 
Hast thou seen him? 


Mor. 
They are leading him hither, but they move slowly. 


st Monk. 
Thou hast seen him then; how does he look now? 


Mor. 
I cannot tell thee. These few hours have done on him the work of many years: he seems broken and haggarded with age, and his quenched eyes are fixed in their sockets, like one who walks in sleep. 


Ben. 
Alas, alas! how changed in little time the bold and gallant Osterloo! 


st Monk. 
Have I not told thee, Morand, that fear will sometimes couch under the brazen helmet as well as the woollen cowl? 


Mor. 
Fear, dost thou call it! Set him this moment in the field of battle, with death threatening him from a hundred points at once, and he would brave it most valiantly. 



Ben. preventing st Monk from answering 
Hush, Brother! Be not so warm, good Lieutenant; 

   

we believe what thou sayest most perfectly. The bravest mind is capable of fear, though it fears no mortal man. A brave man ? fears not man; and an innocent and brave man united, fears nothing. 


Mor. 
Aye, now you speak reason: call it fear then if you will.---But the Prior comes; let us go to our places. 

???????????????????????????????????????? They arrange themselves; and then enter the Prior , with a train of Monks , who likewise arrange themselves: a pause, in which the bell tolls as before, and enter Osterloo , supported by Jerome and Paul, Wovelreid , and Soldiers following . 



Prior. meeting him with solemnity 
Count Osterloo; in obedience to the will of Heaven, for our own preservation, and the just punishment of guilt, I am compelled with the Monks of this monastery over whom I preside, to see duly executed within the time prescribed, this dismal act of retribution.---You have, I trust, with the help of these holy men, as well as a few short moments would allow, closed your mortal account with Heaven: if there be aught that rests upon your mind, regarding worldly concerns which you leave behind you unsettled, let me know your last will, and it shall be obeyed. 
???????????????????????????????????????? To Jerome , after pausing for an answer 
Dost thou think he understands me? 


   




Jer. to Osterloo  
Did you hear, my Son, what the Prior has been saying to you? 


Ost. 
I heard words through a multitude of sounds. 


Jer. 
It was the Prior, desiring to know if you ? have any wishes to fulfil, regarding worldly affairs, left behind you unsettled.---Perhaps to your soldiers you may. 



Ost. interrupting him eagerly and looking wildly round 
My soldiers! are they here? 


Jer. 
Ah, no! they are not here; they are housed for the night in their distant quarters: they will not be here till the setting of to-morrow's sun. 



Ost. groaning deeply 
To-morrow's sun! 


Jer. 
Is there any wish you would have conveyed to them? Are there any of your officers to whom you would send a message or token of remembrance? 


Ost. 
Ye speak again imperfectly, through many ringing sounds. 

 Jer. repeats the question in a slow distinct voice. 



Ost. 
Aye there is: these, these--- 
???????????????????????????????????????? Endeavouring to tear off his cincture and some military ornaments from his dress 
I cannot hit upon these fastenings. 


Jer. 
We'll assist you, my Son. 

Undoing his cincture or girdle, &c. 




Ost. still endeavouring to do it himself 
My sword too, and my daggers.---My last remembrance to them both. 


   



Jer. 
To whom, my Lord? 


Ost. 
Both---all of them. 



Ben. who has kept sorrowfully at some distance, now approaching eagerly 
Urge him no more: his officers will themselves know what names he would have uttered. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Turning to Ost. with an altered voice 
Yes, noble Count; they shall be given as you ? desire with your farewell affection to all your brave followers. 


Ost. 
I thank ye. 


Jer. 
And this is all? 


Ost. 
Nay, nay! 


Ben. 
What is there besides? 



Prior. angrily 
There is too much of this: and some sudden rescue may prevent us. 


Ben. 
Nay, reverend Father, there is no fear of this: you would not cut short the last words of a dying man? 


Prior. 
And must I be guided by thy admonitions? Beware; though Baldwin has not named thee, I know it is thou who art the traitor. 


Ben. 
There is but one object at present to be thought of, and with your leave, reverend Father, I will not be detered from it. 
To Ost. again in a voice of tenderness 
What is there besides, noble Osterloo, that you would wish us to do? 


Ost. 
There is something. 


Ben. 
What is it, my Lord? 


Ost. 
I wot not. 


Ben. 
Then let it rest. 


   



Ost. 
Nay, nay! This---this--- 
???????????????????????????????????????? Pulling a ring from his finger which falls on the ground. 
? My hands will hold nothing. 


Ben. 
I have found it; and what shall I do with it. 



Ost. in a faint hurried voice 
Leonora--- Leonora. 


Ben. 
I understand you, my Lord. 


Prior. 
I am under the necessity, Count Osterloo, of saying, your time is run to its utmost limit: let us call upon you now for your last exertion of nature. These good brothers must conduct you to the scaffold. 
 Jer. and Paul support him towards the scaffold, while Benedict retires to a distance, and turns his back to it. 


Jer. 
Rest upon me, my Son, you have but a few paces to go. 


Ost. 
The ground sinks under me; my feet tread upon nothing. 


Jer. 
We are now at the foot of the scaffold, and there are two steps to mount: lean upon us more firmly. 



Ost. stumbling 
It is dark; I cannot see. 


Jer. 
Alas, my Son! there is a blaze of torches round you. 
After they are on the scaffold 

Now, in token of thy faith in heaven, and forgiveness of all men, raise up thy clasped hands. 
???????????????????????????????????????? Seeing Ost. make a feeble effort, he raises them for him in a posture of devotion 
And now to heaven's mercy we commit thee. 


   


????????????????????????????????????????  Jerome and Paul retire, and two Executioners prepare him for the block, and assist him to kneel. He then lays down his head, and they hold his hands while a third Executioner stands with the raised axe. 



st Ex. speaking close into his ear 
Press my hand when you are ready for the ? stroke. 
???????????????????????????????????????? A long pause. 
He gives no sign. 


d Ex. 
Stop, he will immediately. 
???????????????????????????????????????? A second pause. 
Does he not? 


st Ex. 
No. 


Prior. 
Then give the stroke without it. 

???????????????????????????????????????? d Ex. prepares to give the stroke, when the Imperial Ambassador rushes into the hall, followed by Leonora and Agnes , and a numerous train. 


Am. 
Stop the execution! In the name of your liege Lord the Emperor, I command you to stop upon your peril. My Lord Prior, this is a treacherous and clandestine use of your seignorial power. This noble servant of our Imperial Master 
pointing to Osterloo  
I take under my protection; and you must first deprive an Imperial Ambassador of life, ere one hair of his head fall to the ground. 



Ben. running to the scaffold 
Up, noble Osterloo! Raise up thy head: thou art rescued: thou art free. 


   



Leo. 
Rise, noble Osterloo! dost thou not know the voice that calls thee? 


Ben. 
He moves not; he is in a swoon. 

???????????????????????????????????????? Raises Osterloo from the block whilst Leonora bends over him with anxious tenderdess. 


Leo. 
He is ghastly pale: yet it surely can be but a swoon. Chafe his hands, good Benedict, while I bathe his temples. 
???????????????????????????????????????? After trying to restore him 
Oh, no, no! no change takes place. What ? thinkest thou of it? Is there any life here? 


Ben. 
In truth I know not: this seems to me the fixed ghastly visage of compleat death. 


Leo. 
On, no, no! he will be restored. No stroke has fallen upon him: it cannot be death. Ha! is not that something? Did not his lips move? 


Ben. 
No, Lady; you but deceive yourself: they moved not: they are closed for ever. 



Leo. wringing her hands 
Oh it is so! it is so!---after all thy struggles and exertions of despair, this is thy miserable end!---Alas, alas! thou who didst bear thy crest so proudly in many a well-fought field; this is thy miserable end! 

???????????????????????????????????????? Turning away, and hiding her face in the bosom of Agnes . 



Ambass. examining the body more closely 
I think in very truth he is dead. 


st Gentleman of his Train. 
Yes; the face 

   

never looks thus, till every spark of life is extinguished. 



Ambass. turning fiercely to the Prior  
How is this, Prior? What sorcery has been here, that your block alone should destroy its victim, when the stroke of the axe has been wanting? What account shall I carry to my master of the death of his gallant General? 


Prior. 
No sorcery hath been practised on the ? deceased: his own mind has dealt with him alone, and produced the effects you behold. And, when you return to Lewis of Bavaria your Master; tell him that his noble General, free from personal injury of any kind, died, within the walls of this monastery, of fear. 


Ambass. 
Nay, nay, my good Prior; put the fool's cap on thine own head, and tell him this tale thyself.---Fear! Osterloo and fear coupled together! when the lion and the fawn are found couching in the same lair, we will believe this. 


Prior. 
All the Brothers of the Order will attest it. 


Ambass. 
Away with the testimony of your cowled witnesses! 
???????????????????????????????????????? Beckoning Morand to come near 
Morand, thou art a brave fellow; I have known thee of old. Thou art the Prior's officer indeed; but thou art now under my protection, and shalt be received into the Emperor's service with encreased rank: Speak the truth then, boldly; how died Count Osterloo? 


   



Mor. 
In very truth then, my Lord, according to my simple thoughts, he died even as the Prior has told you. 


Ambass. 
? Out upon thy hireling's tongue! art thou not ashamed, thyself wearing a Soldier's garb, to blast a Soldier's fame? There is no earthly thing the brave Osterloo was ever known to fear. 


Mor. 
You say true, my Lord; and on my sword's point I'll maintain it against any man as stoutly as yourself. But here is a pious Monk 
pointing to Jerome  
who will explain to you what I should speak of but lamely. 


Jer. 
With the Prior's permission, my Lord, if you will retire with me a little while, I'll inform you of this mysterious event, even simply as it happened. And perhaps you will then confess, that, called upon suddenly, under circumstances impressing powerfully the imagination, to put off this mortal frame, and stand forth in that tremendous presence, before which this globe, with all its mighty empires, hangs but as a crisped rain-drop, shivering on the threaded gossamer; the bravest mind may, if a guilty one, feel that within which is too powerful for human nature to sustain. 


Ambass. 
Explain it as thou wilt; I shall listen to thee: but think not to cheat our Imperial ? Master of his revenge for the loss of his gallant General. I shall not fail, my Lord Prior, to report to him the meek spirit of your christian authority, which has made the general weal of 

   

the community subservient to your private revenge; and another month, I trust, shall not pass over our heads, till a worthier man 
pointing to Benedict  
shall possess this power which you have so greatly abused.--- ---Let the body be removed, and laid in solemn state, till it be delivered into the hands of those brave troops, who shall inter it with the honours of a Soldier. 

Back matter 

THE END.


?
?

NOTES
^ List of speakers 
ST EX
ST GENTLEMAN OF HIS TRAIN
ST MONK
ST OFF
ST PEAS
ST SER
ST SOLD
ST WOMAN
D EX
D PEAS
D SER
D SOLD
D PEAS. WOMAN
D SER
D SOLD
TH PEAS. OLD WOMAN
AG
AGN
AM
AMBASS
BEN
JE
JER
LAY-B
LEO
MANY SOLDIERS
MONK
MOR
OMNES
OST
PAUL
PEAS
PRIOR
SEX
SOLDIERS
WOV

 ____________________________________________________________


Full text: THE ELECTION: A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS. Front matter
TO MATTHEW BAILLIE, M. D. AS AN OFFERING OF GRATITUDE AND AFFECTION FOR THE UNWEARIED ZEAL AND BROTHERLY PARTIALITY WHICH HAVE CHEERED AND SUPPORTED ME IN THE COURSE OF THIS WORK, I INSCRIBE THIS VOLUME.
 
 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN: Baltimore , a country gentleman and the head of an old family fallen into decay.
Freeman , a great clothier, who has acquired by his own industry a very large fortune.
Truebridge , the friend of Baltimore.
Charles , an idle young man, cousin to Baltimore, and brought up in his house.
Jenkison , an attorney.
Servet , an attorney.
Bescatti , an Italian master.
David , a servant to Baltimore,
Peter , a servant to Baltimore,
Voters, Mob, Boys, Jailers, &c. &c.
WOMEN: Mrs. Baltimore .
Mrs. Freeman .
Charlotte , daughter to Freeman.
Governess .
Margery , an old servant of the Baltimore family.
Servants, Voters Wives, Mob, &c.

 
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. The open market-place of a small country town, a croud of men, women, and children seen on the back ground; Margery and Countryman surrounded with several others are discovered talking on the front of the stage. Margery. Patron ! pot-man an' you will. As long as he holds the brown jug to their heads, they'll run after him an' he were the devil. Oh! that I should live to see the heir of the ancient family of Baltimore set aside in his own borough by a nasty, paltry, nobody-knows-who of an upstart! What right has he, forsooth! to set himself up for to oppose a noble gentleman? I remember his own aunt very well; a poor, industrious, pains-taking woman, with scarcely a pair of shoes to her feet.
Countryman. Well, well, and what does that signify, Goody? He has covered more bare feet with new shoes since he came among us, than all the noble families in the country, let his aunt wear what shoes
 
she would: ay, and his bounty has filled more empty bellies too, though his granum might dine on a turnip, for aught I know or care about the matter.
Mar. Don't tell me about his riches, and his bounty, and what not: will all that ever make him any thing else than the son of John Freeman the weaver? I wonder to hear you talk such nonsense, Arthur Wilkins; you that can read books and understand reason: such a fellow as that is not good enough to stand cap in hand before Mr. Baltimore.
                                         The rabble come forward huzzaing, and making a great noise, and take different sides of the stage. Croud on F. side.    Huzza! huzza! Freeman for ever!
Mar. Yes, yes, to be sure: Freeman for ever! fat Sam the butcher for ever! black Dick the tinker for ever! any body is good enough for you, filthy rapscallions!
st Mob on F. side. Ay, scold away, old Margery! Freeman for ever! say I. Down with your proud, pennyless gentry! Freeman for ever!
Mar. Down with your rich would-be-gentry upstarts! Baltimore for ever! to mob on her side Why don't you call out, oafs?                                          The mob on her side call out Baltimore, and the mob on the other, Freeman; but the F. side gets the better. What, do you give it up so? you poor, spiritless nincumpoops! I would roar till I bursted first, before
 
I would give it up so to such a low-liv'd, beggarly rabble.
d Mob on F. side. They lack beef and porter, Margery. That makes fellows loud and hearty, I trow. Coats of arms and old pictures wont fill a body's stomach. Come over to Freeman-hall, and we'll shew you good cheer, woman. Freeman for ever!
Mar. Ha' done with your bawling, blackimoor! what care I for your good cheer? none of your porter nor your beef for me, truly!
d Mob on F. side.    No, Goody! mayhap, as you have been amongst the gentry all your life, you may prefer a cup of nice sage tea, or a little nice ruewater, or a leg of a roasted snipe, or a bit of a nice tripe dumplin.
Mar. Close your fool's mouth, oaf! or I'll cram a dumplin into it that you wont like the chewing of Mr. Baltimore's father kept a table like a prince, when your poor beggarly candidate's father had scarcely a potatoe in his pot. But knaves like you were not admitted within his gates to see it, indeed. Better men than you, or your master either, were not good enough to take away his dirty trenchers; and the meanest creature about his house was as well dress'd, and in as good order, as if it had been the king's court, and every day in the year had been a Sunday.
d Mob on F. side. So they were, Goody; I remember it very well; the very sucking pigs ran about his yard with full bottom'd wigs on, and the
 
grey goose waddled through the dirt with a fine flounced petticoat.
Mar. Hold your fool's tongue, do! no upstart parliament-men for me! Baltimore for ever!
Croud on B. side call out Baltimore for ever!
st Mob on B. side.    Sour paste and tangled bobbins for weavers!
st Mob on F. side. Empty purses and tatter'd lace for gentlemen!
Old woman on B. side. We'll have no strange new-comers for our member: Baltimore for me!
Old woman on F. side. Good broth is better than good blood, say I: Freeman for me!
Little Boy on B. side.
Weaver, weaver, flap, flap!
Grin o'er your shuttle, and rap, rap!                                          acting the motion of a weaver. Little Boy on F. side.
Gentleman, gentleman, proud of a word!
Stand on your tip-toes, and bow to my lord!                                          acting a gentleman. Mar. Go, you little devil's imp! who teaches you to blaspheme your betters?
                                         She gives the boy a box on the ear: the mob on the other side take his part: a great uproar and confusion, and exeunt both sides fighting.
 
SCENE II. A walk leading through a grove to Baltimore's house, and close by it. Enter Mrs. Baltimore, as if just alighted from her carriage, followed by her Maid and Peter, carrying a box and port-folio and other things. Mrs. Balt. But what does all this distant noise and huzzaing mean? the whole town is in commotion.
Pet. It is nothing as I know of, Ma'am, but my Master and Mr. Freeman's voters fighting with one another at the alehouse doors, to shew their goodwill to the candidates, as all true hearty fellows do at an election.
Mrs. B. Yes, our member is dead suddenly; I had forgot. But who are the candidates?
Pet. My master, Madam, and Mr. Freeman.
Mrs. B. Gentlemen supported by them, you mean?
Pet. No Ma'am, I mean their own two selves, for their own two selves. But I beg pardon for naming such a man as Freeman on the same day with a gentleman like my Master.
Mrs. B. Mr. Freeman, if you please, Peter; and never let me hear you name him with disrespect in my presence. Carry those things into the house: to the maid and you too, Blond; I see Mr. Baltimore.
                                         Exeunt servants. Enter Baltimore. Balt. My dear Isabella, you are welcome home; how are you after your journey?

 
Mrs. B. Perfectly well; and very glad, even after so short an absence, to find myself at home again.    But what is going on here? I have heard strange news just now: Peter tells me you are a candidate for the Borough, and Mr. Freeman is your rival. It is some blunder of his own, I suppose?
Balt. No, it is not.
Mrs. B. stepping back in surprise, and holding up her hands. And are you actually throwing away the last stake of your ruin'd fortune on a contested election?
Balt. I will sell every acre of land in my possession, rather than see that man sit in parliament for the borough of Westown.
Mrs. B. And why should not he as well as another? The declining fortunes of your family have long made you give up every idea of the kind for yourself: of what consequence, then, can it possibly be to you? I know very well, my dear Baltimore, it is not a pleasant thing for the representative of an old family declined in fortune, to see a rich obscure stranger buy up all the land on every side, and set himself down like a petty prince in his neighbourhood. But if he had not done it, some other most likely would; and what should we have gain'd by the change?
Balt. O! any other than himself I could have suffer'd.
Mrs. B.    You amaze me. He has some disagreeable follies I confess, but he is friendly and liberal.

 
Balt. Yes, yes, he affects patronage and public spirit: he is ostentatious to an absurdity.
Mrs. B. Well then, don't disturb yourself about it. If he is so, people will only laugh at him.
Balt. O! hang them, but they wont laugh! I have seen the day, when, if a man made himself ridiculous, the world would laugh at him. But now, by heaven, every thing that is mean, disgusting, and absurd, pleases them but so much the better! If they would but laugh at him, I should be content.
Mrs. B. My dear Baltimore! curb this strange fancy that has taken such a strong hold of your mind, and be reasonable.
Balt. I can be reasonable enough. I can see as well as you do that it is nonsense to disturb myself about this man; and when he is absent I can resolve to endure him: but whenever I see him again, there is something in his full satisfied face; in the tones of his voice; ay, in the very gait and shape of his legs, that is insufferable to me.
Mrs. B. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!
Balt.    What makes you laugh, Madam?
Mrs. B. Indeed I have more cause to cry! yet I could not help laughing when you talk'd of his gait and his legs: for people, you must know, have taken it into their heads that there is a resemblance between you and him; I have, myself, in twilight, sometimes mistaken the one for the other.
Balt. It must have been in midnight, I think.
 
People have taken it into their heads! blind idiots! I could kick my own shins if I thought they had the smallest resemblance to his.
Mrs. B. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!
Balt. And this is matter of amusement for you, Ma'am? I abhor laughing?
Mrs. B. Pray, pray forgive me! This is both ludicrous and distressing. I knew that you disliked this man from the first day he settled in your neighbourhood, and that, during two years acquaintance, your aversion has been daily encreasing; but I had no idea of the extravagant height to which it has now arrived.
Balt. Would I had sold every foot of my lands, and settled in the lone wilds of America, 'ere this man came, to be the swoln possessor of my forefathers    lands; their last remaining son, now cramp'd and elbow'd round, in one small corner of their once wide and extensive domains! Oh! I shall never forget what I felt, when, with that familiar and disgusting affability, he first held out to me his damned palm, and hail'd me as a neighbour. striding up and down the stage. Ay, by my soul, he pretends to be affable!
Mrs. B. You feel those things too keenly.
Balt. A stock or a stone would feel it. He has opposed me in every contest, from the election of a member of parliament down to the chusing of a parish clerk; and yet, damn him! he will never give me a fair occasion of quarrelling with him, for then I should be happier. striding up and down again.
 
Hang it! it was not worth a pinch of snuff to me, whether the high road went on one side of my field or the other; but only that I saw he was resolved to oppose me in it, and I would have died rather than have yielded to him.
Mrs. B. Are you sure, Baltimore, that your own behaviour has not provoked him to that opposition?
Balt. striding up and down as he speaks. He has extended his insolent liberalities over the whole country round. The very bantlings lisp his name    as they sit on their little stools in the sun.
Mrs. B. My dear friend!
Balt. He has built two new towers to his house; and it rears up its castled head amongst the woods, as if its master were the lord and chieftain of the whole surrounding county.
Mrs. B. And has this power to offend you?
Balt. No, no, let him pile up his house to the clouds, if he will! I can bear all this patiently: it is his indelicate and nauseous civility that drives me mad. He goggles and he smiles; he draws back his full watry lip like a toad. making a mouth of disgust. Then he spreads out his nail-bitten fingers as he speaks—hah!
Mrs. B. And what great harm does all this do you?
Balt. What harm! it makes my very flesh creep, like the wrigglings of a horse-leech or a maggot. It is an abomination beyond all endurance!

 
Mrs. B. The strange fancies you take in regard to every thing this poor man does, are to me astonishing.
Balt. Stopping short, and looking fixedly on her. Are to you astonishing! I doubt it not: I was a fool to expect that a wife so many years younger than myself would have any sympathy with my feelings.
Mrs. B.    Baltimore! you wrong me, unkindly.— But his daughter comes: she will over-hear us.
Balt. What brings that affected fool here? She is always coming here. It is an excrescence from the toad's back: the sight of her is an offence to me.
                                         Enter Charlotte, with an affected air of great delicacy. Char. How do you do, my dear Mrs. Baltimore? I am quite charm'd to see you. curtseys affectedly to Balt.
Mrs. B. I thank you, my dear, you are early abroad this morning.
Char. Oh! I am almost kill'd with fatigue; but I saw your carriage at the gate, and I could not deny myself the pleasure of enquiring how you do. The heat overcomes one so much in this weather: it is enough to make one faint: it is really horrid. speaking in a faint soft voice, and fanning herself affectedly.
Mrs. B. It does not affect me.
Char. No! O you are not so robust I am sure.
                                         Enter a little country girl, trailing a great piece of muslin after her.
 
Girl. to Char. Here, Miss; here is a piece of your petticoat that you left on the bushes, as you scrambled over the hedge to look at the bird's nest yonder.
Char. in confusion. O la! the briars will catch hold of one so, as one goes along. Give it me, give it me. takes the muslin, and crams it hastily into her pocket.    This weather makes one go by the side of ditches, and amongst bushes, and any where for a little shade.
Balt. Tadpoles love ditches in all weathers.
                                         Exit. Char. looking after him strangely for a moment or two, and then skipping lightly up to Mrs. B. and taking her kindly by the hand. Thank heaven he's gone! I stand more in awe of him, than my mother and my governess, and all the whole pack of masters that ever came about the house. If there was not a certain look about him now and then, that puts me in mind of my father, I should take a downright aversion to him. O! I beg pardon! I mean I should not like him very well, even tho' he is your husband. But was it not provoking in that little chit to follow me with those rags in her hand?
Mrs. B. I suppose we shall have a glove or a garter coming after you bye-and-bye.
Char. O they may bring what they please now! —Well, How d'ye do? how d'ye do? how d'ye do? taking Mrs. B. by the hand, and skipping round her joyfully.

 
Mrs. B. Very well, my good little Charlotte.
Char. I am delighted to see you return'd. Ah, don't you remember how good you were to me, when I was a little urchin at Mrs. Highman's school? and how I used to stand by your side when    you dress'd, and count over the pins in your pincushion?
Mrs. B. I remember it very well.
Char. But how comes it that we meet so seldom? you never come to see us now, and I dare not come to you so often as I wish, for Mr. Baltimore looks at me so sternly. Let papa and him contend with one another as they please; what have we to do with their plaguy election? O if we were but together! we could work and talk to one another all day long, and it would be so pleasant!
Mrs. B. Indeed, my dear Charlotte, I wish I could have you frequently with me; but I hope you have many pleasant employments at home.
Char. Ah, but I have not tho'. I am tired to death of music, and drawing, and Italian, and German, and geography, and astronomy, and washes to make my hands white. shaking her head piteously. But what does it signify fretting? I know I must be an accomplish'd woman; I know it very well.
Mrs. B. smiling Don't you like to be occupied?
Char. O yes: it is not that I am a lazy girl. If they would plague me no more with my masters, but give me some plain pocket-handkerchiefs to hem, I would sit upon the foot-stool all day, and sing like a linnet.

 
Mrs. B.    My dear girl, and so there must be things in this mix'd world to keep even thy careless breast from being as blithe as a linnet. But you were going home: I'll walk a little way with you.
Char. I thank you looking off the stage. Is not that Charles at a distance? I dare say, now, he has been a fishing, or looking after coveys of partridges, or loit'ring about the horse dealers. I hope he did not see me get over the hedge tho'.
Mrs. B. Alas poor Charles! I wish he had more useful occupations. It is a sad thing for a young man to be hanging about idle.
Char. So my papa says: and, do you know, I believe he had it in his head to get some appointment for him when this election came in the way. Shall I put him in mind of it?
Mrs. B. No no, my dear Charlotte, that must not be. Shall we walk?
Char. scampering off. Stop a little, pray.
                                         Exit. Mrs. B. Where is she gone to now?
Char. returning with something in her lap. Only to fetch my two black kittens. I bought them from a boy, as I went along, to save them from drowning. I could not curtsey to Mr. Baltimore, you know, with kittens in my lap, so I dropp'd them    slyly under the hedge as I enter'd; for this fellow with the white spot on his nose makes a noise like a little devil.
                                         They go arm in arm to the side of the stage to go out, when Mrs. B. looking behind her, stops short. Mrs. B. No, I must not walk farther with you
 
just now: I see Mr. Truebridge coming this way, and I wish to speak to him. Good morning, my dear Charlotte.                                          Exit Charlotte. Enter Truebridge. You are hurrying away very fast; I did not know you were here.
True. I have been in the library writing a letter, which I ought to have done before I left my own house. I am going from home for a few days, and I came to see Baltimore before I set out.
Mrs. B. You are always going from home. I am very sorry you are going at this time, when your presence here might have been so useful. You might have persuaded Baltimore, perhaps, to give up this foolish contest with so rich a competitor as Freeman.
True. No, it is better, perhaps, to let them fight it out. We should only have separated them, like two game cocks, who are sure to be at it again, beak and spurs, with more fury than ever.
Re-enter Baltimore. Balt. to True. You have forgot your letter. A pleasant journey to you! gives him a letter.
True. Farewell for a few days! I hope to learn on    my return, that you have carried on this contest with temper and liberality, since you will engage in it.
Balt. Why you know, Truebridge, I am compell'd to engage in it.
True. O certainly, and by very weighty reasons too! A man may injure in a hundred different ways and provoke no hostile return; but, when added to
 
some petty offences, he varies his voice and gesture, wears his coat and doublet, nay, picks his very teeth in a manner that is irksome to us, what mortal is there, either pagan or believer, that can refrain from setting himself in array against him?
Balt. Well well! give yourself no trouble. I'll keep my temper; I'll do every thing calmly and reasonably.
True. Do so; I sha'n't return, probably, till the poll is closed. I have told you my reasons for taking no part in the business; and let the new member be who he will, I am resolved to shake hands cordially with him. It won't do for one who has honours and pensions in view, to quarrel with great men. Good bye! to you!—Madam, all success to your wishes.
                                         Exit. Balt. Ask favours of such a creature as Freeman!    He speaks it but in jest. Yet if I did not know him to be one of the most independent men in the world, I should be tempted to believe that he too had become sophisticated.
Mrs. B. Ah do not torment yourself with suspicions! I am afraid it is a disposition that has been growing upon you of late.
Balt. No, madam; it is upon you this disposition has been growing. Whenever I am in the company of that—I will not name him—I have of late observed that your eyes are bent upon me perpetually. I hate to be look'd at when I am in that man's company.
                                         Exeunt.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.

 
ACT II. SCENE I. A room in Freeman's house; a table with drawings, &c. scattered upon it, in one corner, and a writing table near the front of the stage. Mrs. Freeman is discovered writing. Enter Charlotte and her Governess. Mrs. Freeman , raising her head. Come here, Miss Freeman: that gown sits with no grace in the world. turning Char. round. No, it is not at all what I intended: I shall have it taken to pieces again. To the Gov. Was she in the stocks this morning?
Gov. Yes, Madam.
Mrs. F. From her manner of holding her head one would scarcely believe it. Go to your drawing, and finish it if you can before Mr. Bescatti comes.
                                         Charlotte sits down unwillingly to the drawing table; the Governess takes her work and sits by her; and Mrs. Freeman sits down again to write. Enter Mr. Bescatti. Mrs. F. O Bescatti! you are just the very person I want. I have put a quotation from one of your Italian poets, expressive of the charms of friendship, into the letter I am writing to my dear, amiable Mrs. Sillabub; and as I know she shews all the letters she receives from her friends, I would not have
 
a fault in it for the world. Look at it, pray! Will it do? giving him the letter with an air of self-satisfaction.
Bes. shaking his head. No, Madam; I must be free for to say, dat it won't do: de two first ords are wrong, and de two last ords are not right.
Mrs. F. colouring and bridling up. Why there are but four words of it altogether, Mr. Bescatti.
Bes. Yes, Madam; der you be very right; der    you be under no mistake at all; der be just four ords in it, neider more nor less.
Mrs. F. Well, well, pray correct it for me! I suppose I was thinking of something else when I wrote it.
Bes. after correcting the letter. It is done, Madam. I hope de young lady will soon finish her drawing, dat I may have de honour to propose my little instruction.
Char. rising from the table. I can finish it tomorrow.
Mrs. F. Shew Mr. Bescatti your two last drawings Char. shews him her drawings. Every one from your country is fond of this delightful art. How do you like this piece?
Bes. It be very agreeable.
Gov. looking over his shoulder. O beautiful, charming! de most pretty of de world!
Mrs. F. There is such a fine glow in the colouring, so much spirit in the whole.
Bes. tardily Yes.

 
Mrs. F. And so much boldness in the design.
Bes. tardily Yes.
Mrs. F. And the cattle in that landscape are so spirited and so correct.
Bes. O dey be de very pretty sheep, indeed.
Mrs. F. Why, those are cows, Mr. Bescatti—    those are cows.
Bes. O, Madam, I make no doubt dat in reality dey are de cows, alto in appearance dey are de sheep.
Mrs. F. shewing him another piece. He will understand this better. The subject is so prettily imagined! a boy with an apple in his hand: such pleasing simplicity! look at those lights and shades: her master himself says it is touched with the hand of an artist.
Bes. Yes, he be a very pretty fellow—and a very happy one too: he has got one apple in his hand, and anoder in his mout.
Mrs. F. Another in his mouth! why that is the round swelling of his cheek, Mr. Bescatti. But look at this head impatiently as he looks at the wrong one No, no, this one.
Bes. O dat one—dat has one side of the face white and t'oder black!
Gov. O beautiful, excellent!—all dat der is of pretty—all dat der is of—of de most pretty!
Mrs. F. There is so much effect in it; so much force and distinctness.
Bes. Yes, der be good contrast; nobody will mistake de one side of de face for de oder.

 
Enter Servant. Ser.    Every thing in the next room is set out, Ma'am—Have you any orders?
Mrs. F. Don't trouble me about it: I'll look at it by and by, if I have nothing better to do. Exit Ser. —Miss Freeman, there is no time to lose; Bescatti and you must be busy, for I expect Mr. Tweedle this morning with a new song in his pocket.
Enter a Servant hastily. Ser. All the voters are come, Ma'am, and my master says, we must open the great room immediately.
                                         Opens folding-doors at the bottom of the stage, and discovers a large room with a long table set out, plentifully covered with cold meats, &c. &c. Mrs. F. What could possess the creatures to come so early? If I am to have the whole morning of it, I shall be dead before it is over. Heigh ho! here they are.
                                         Enter a great number of voters with their wives and daughters, and Freeman shewing them in himself. Free. with a very affable smiling countenance. Come in, ladies and gentlemen; come in, my very good neighbours; my wife will be proud to see you. presents them to Mrs. Freeman, who receives them with affected condescension; whilst Charlotte draws herself up by her mother's side, and curtseys to them in the same affected manner. —This is my very good friend Mr. Ginger, my dear; and this is worthy Mr. Fudge. —But where is your wife, Mr. Fudge? we are near
 
neighbours, you know, and I see no reason why your good woman and mine should not be better acquainted.
Mr. Fudge. She is standing close by you, Sir.
Free. O, I beg pardon, my dear Madam! I did    not know you. to Mrs. Fudge. —My dear, this is Mrs. Fudge. presenting her to Mrs. F. —But my good Mr. Hassock, why have not you brought your pretty daughter with you?
Mr. Hassock. So I have, your honour; this be she. pointing to his daughter.
Free. She must give me her hand: I have a girl of my own too, you see; but she does not hold up her head so well as this young lady. More people still coming in. Ha! welcome, my good friends! welcome, my good neighbour Huskins, and you too my good Mrs. Huskins!—Ha, Mr. Grub! you do me honour. How do the soap-works go on? you will soon be the richest man in the country, though you do spare me a morning now and then.
Mr. Grub conceitedly. Aye, picking up a little in my poor way, just to keep the pot boiling. Going up to Mrs. Freeman, and wiping his face. Madam, I make bold, as the fashion goes on them there occasions.
                                         Gives her a salute with a good loud smack, whilst she shrinks back disconcerted, and Bescatti and the Governess shrug up their shoulders, and Charlotte skulks behind their backs frightened. Mr. Fudge spitting out his chew of tobacco and wiping his mouth. As the fashion goes round, Madam—

 
Free. preventing him as he is going up to Mrs. F. No, no, my good neighbours: this is too much ceremony amongst friends. Let us go into the next room, and see if there is any thing to eat: I dare say there is some cold meat and cucumber for us. Let me have the honour, Mrs. Fudge.                                          They all go into the next room and seat themselves round the table. Re-enter Freeman in a great bustle.    More chairs and more covers, here! Thomas! Barnaby! Jenkins! the servants run up and down carrying things across the stage. Enter more people. Ha! welcome—welcome, my good friends! we were just looking for you. Go into the next room, and try if you can find any thing you like.
Voter. O, Sir, never fear but we shall find plenty of good victuals.
                                         Exeunt into the next room. Manet Charlotte, who comes forward. Char. La, how I should like to be a queen, and stand in my robes, and have all the people introduced to me! for then they would kiss no more than my hand, which I should hold out so. No, no; it should be so.
                                         stretching out her hand whilst Charles Baltimore, entering behind and overhearing her, takes and kisses it with a ludicrous bending of the knee. Charles. And which should be kisses so?
Char. affectedly You are always so silly, Mr. Charles Baltimore.
Charles. Are you holding court here for all those good folks? I thought there was no harm in looking in upon you, though I do belong to the other side. peeping. Faith they are busy enough! mercy
 
on us, what a clattering of trenchers!—How do you like them?
Char. Oh they are such savages! I'm sure if I had not put lavender on my pocket handkerchief, like Mama, I should have fainted away.
Charles. How can you talk of fainting with cheeks    like two cabbage roses?
Char. Cabbage roses!
Charles. No, no—pest take it!—I mean the pretty, delicate damask rose.
Char. La, now you are flattering me!
Charles. I am not indeed, Charlotte! you have the prettiest— peeping at the other room and stopping short.
Char. eagerly I have the prettiest what!
Charles. Is that a venison pasty they have got yonder!
Char. Poo, never mind!—I have the prettiest what?
Charles. Yes, I mean the most beautiful peeping again By my faith and so it is a venison pasty, and a monstrous good smell it has!
                                         Exit hastily into the eating room. Char. looking after him. What a nasty creature he is! he has no more sense than one of our pointers; he's always running after a good smell.
                                         Exit.
 
SCENE II. An open lane near a country town. Enter Baltimore, who passes half way across the stage, and then stopping suddenly, shrinks back. Balt. Ha, it is him!—I'll turn and go another way. Turns hastily back again, and then stops short. No, no, he sha'n't see me avoiding him. I'll follow Truebridge's advice, and be civil to him.— Enter Freeman bowing with stiff civility Good morning, Sir.
Free. And the same to you, Mr. Baltimore: how does your Lady do?
Balt. And your amiable lady, Mr. Freeman; she is a great scholar I hear.
Free. with his face brightening up. You are very good to say so; she does indeed know some few things pretty well; and though we are rivals for the present, why shouldn't we act liberally and speak handsomely of one another at the same time? Does Mrs. Baltimore like pine-apples as well as she used to do?
Balt. shrinking back. No she dislikes them very much.
Free. Don't say so now! I believe you don't like me to send them to you, but if you would just send over for them yourself when she wants them, I have mountains of them at her service.
Balt. with a contemptuous smile. Shall I send a    tumbrel for them to-morrow morning? Free. draws
 
back piqued. But you are liberal to every body, Mr. Freeman. I hope you and your friends have got over the fatigues of your morning feast? You were at it by times I hear.
Free. Yes, we have been busy in the eating and drinking way to be sure. I don't make speeches to them, and fill their heads with fine oratory; I give them from my plain stores what they like better, Mr. Baltimore.
Balt. And what you can spare better, Mr. Freeman. It is fortunate for both parties, that your stores are more applicable to the stomach than the head.
Free. It is better, at least, than flattering them up with advertisements in the newspapers, about their great dignity and antiquity, &c. I don't spend my money in feeding other people's vanity.
Balt. No, certainly, Sir; charity begins at home; and your own has, thank God! a very good appetite.
Free. Pamper'd vanity is a better thing, perhaps, than starved pride. Good morning, Sir.
                                         Exit. Balt. looking after him. See how consequentially he walks now, shaking his long coat-skirts with that abominable swing! I should detest my own brother if he swung himself about after that manner.—    Resemblance to him do they say! I could lock myself up in a cell, if I thought so, and belabour my own shoulders with a cat-o'-nine tails.
                                         Enter Peter with one of his idle companions, and starts back upon seeing Baltimore. Pet. aside to his Com. Pest take it! a body can never be a little comfortable in a sly way, but there
 
is always some cross luck happens to him. Yonder is my master, and he thinks I am half a dozen miles off with a letter that he gave me to Squire Houndly. Stand before me, man; perhaps he'll go past. skulking behind his Com.
Balt. seeing him. What, you careless rascal, are you here still, when I told you the letter was of consequence to me? To have this stick broke over your head is less than you deserve: where have you been, sirrah? Holding up his stick in a threatening manner.
Pet. O Lord, your honour! if you should beat me like stock fish I must e'en tell you the truth: for as I past by the cat and bagpipes a little while ago, I could not help just setting my face in at the door to see what they were all about; and there I found such a jolly company of 'Squire Freeman's voters, sitting round a bowl of punch, drinking his liquors and laughing at his grandeur, and making such a mockery of it, that I could not help staying to make a little merry with them myself.
Balt. Lowering his stick.    Art thou sure that they laugh'd at him?—In his own inn, and over his own liquor?
Pet. Ay, to be sure, your honour: what do they care for that? When he orders a hogshead of ale for them out of his own cellar, they call it a pack of lamb's wool from the wool chamber. Don't they neighbour?
                                         tipping the wink to his companion. Com. To be sure they do.

 
Balt. Ha, ha, ha! ungrateful merry varlets!— Well well! get thee along and be more expeditious with my letters another time. to himself as he goes out. Ha, ha! a good name for his ale truly.
                                         Exit. Pet. I wonder he did not give me a litte money now for such a story as this. Howsomever, it has saved my head from being broke.
Com. And that, I think is fully as much as it is worth. I wonder you an't ashamed to behave with so little respect to a gentleman and your own master.
Pet. Fiddle faddle with all that! do you think one gets on the blind side of a man to treat him with respect? When I first came to live with Mr. Baltimore, I must say I was woundily afraid of his honour, but I know how to manage him now well enough.
Com.    I think thou dost, indeed. Who would have thought it, that had seen what a bumpkin he took thee from the plough's tail, but a twelvemonth ago, because he could not afford to hire any more fine trained servants to wait upon him?
Pet. Nay, I wa'n't such a simpleton as you took me for neither. I was once before that very intimate, in my fashion, with an old Squire of the North Country, who was in love with his grand-daughter's dairy-maid. I warrant you I know well enough how to deal with any body that has got any of them strange fancies working within them, for as great a bumpkin as you may take me to be; and if you don't see me, 'ere long time goes by, make a good
 
penny of it too, I'll give you leave to call me a noodle. Come, away to the Blue-Posts again, and have another glass, man.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE III. Freeman's library fitted up expensively with fine showy books and book-cases, &c. &c. Enter Freeman and Mrs. Freeman, speaking as they enter. Free. They sh'a'nt come again, then, since it displeases you; but they all went away in such good humour, it did my heart good to see them.
Mrs. F. Oh the Goths and the Huns! I believe the smell of their nauseous tobacco will never leave my nostrils. You don't know what I have suffered to oblige you. To any body of delicacy and refinement, it was shocking. I shall be nervous and languid for a month. But I don't complain. You know I do every thing cheerfully that can promote your interest. Oh! I am quite overcome.
                                         sits down languidly. Free. Indeed, my dear, I know you never complain, and I am sorry I have imposed such a task upon your goodness. But the adversary gains ground upon us, and if I do not exert myself, the ancient interest of the Baltimore's—the old prejudice of family, may still carry the day.
Mrs. F. starting up eagerly, and throwing aside her assumed languor. That it sha'nt do if gold and activity can prevent it! Old prejudice of family! Who has a better right than yourself to serve for the borough of Westown?

 
Free. So you say, my dear; and you are generally in the right. But I don't know; I don't feel as if I did altogether right in opposing Mr. Baltimore, in    his own person, in the very spot where his family has so long presided. If he did not provoke me—
Mrs. F. What, have you not got over these scruples yet? Has not all the rancorous opposition you have met with from him, wound you up to a higher pitch than this, Mr. Freeman? It has carried you thro' with many petty struggles against his proud will already, and would you let him get the better of you now?
Free. thoughtfully. I could have wished to have lived in peace with him.
Mrs. Free. Yes, if he would have suffered you.
Free. Ay, indeed, if he would have suffered me. musing for some time. Well, it is very extraordinary this dislike which he seems to have taken to me: it is inexplicable! I came into his neighbourhood with the strongest desire to be upon good terms with, nay to be upon the most friendly and familiar footing with him; yet he very soon opposed me in every thing. walking up and down and then stopping short. I asked him to dine with me almost every day, just as one would ask their oldest and most intimate acquaintance; and he knew very well I expected no entertainments in return, which    would have been a foolish expence in his situation, for I took care in the handsomest manner to let him understand as much.

 
Mrs. F. Well well, never trouble your head about that now; but think how you may be revenged upon him.
Free. Tho' his fortune was reduced, and I in possession of almost all the estates of the Baltimores, of more land, indeed, than they ever possessed, I was always at pains to assure him that I respected him as much as the richest man in the county; and yet, I cannot understand it, the more friendly and familiar I was with him, the more visibly his aversion to me increased. It is past all comprehension!
Mrs. F. Don't trouble yourself about that now.
Free. I'm sure I was ready upon every occasion to offer him my very best advice; and, after the large fortune I have acquired, I may be well supposed to be no novice in many things.
Mrs. F. O he has no sense of obligations.
Free. Ay, and knowing how narrow his income is in respect to the stile of living he has been accustomed to; when company came upon him unexpectedly, have I not sent and offered him every    thing in my house, even to the best wines in my cellars, which he has pettishly and absurdly refused?
Mrs. F. O he has no gratitude in him!
Free. If I had been distant, and stood upon the reserve with him, there might have been some cause. Well, it is altogether inexplicable!
Mrs. F. I'm sure it is not worth while to think so much about it.

 
Free. Ah, but I can't help thinking! Have I not made the ground round his house, as well as my own, look like a well-weeded garden? I have cut down the old gloomy trees; and where he used to see nothing from his windows but a parcel of old knotted oaks shaking themselves in the wind, he now looks upon two hundred rood of the best hotwalls in the North of England, besides two new summer-houses and a green-house.
Mrs. F. O he has no taste!
Free. The stream which I found running thro' the woods, as shaggy and as wild as if it had been in a desert island, and the foot of man never marked upon its banks, I have straightened, and levelled, and dressed, till the sides of it are as nice as a bowling-green.
Mrs. F. He has no more taste than a savage, that's certain. However, you must allow that he    wants some advantages which you possess: his wife is a woman of no refinement.
Free. I don't know what you mean by refinement: She don't sing Italian and play upon the harp, I believe; but she is a very civil, obliging, good, reasonable woman.
Mrs. F. contemptuously. Yes, she is a very civil, obliging, good, reasonable woman. I wonder how some mothers can neglect the education of their children so! If she had been my daughter, I should have made a very different thing of her, indeed.
Free. I doubt nothing, my dear, of your good instructions and example. But here comes Jenkison.

 
Enter Jenkison. How, now, Jenkison? things go on prosperously I hope.
Jen. Sir, I am concerned—or, indeed, sorry— that is to say, I wish I could have the satisfaction to say that they do.
Free. What say you? sorry and satisfied? You are a smooth spoken man, Mr. Jenkison, but tell me the worst at once. I thought I had been pretty sure of it as the poll stood this morning.
Jen. It would have given me great pleasure, Sir, to have confirmed that opinion; but unfortunately for you, and unpleasantly for myself—
Free.    Tut, tut, speak faster, man! What is it?
Jen. An old gentleman from Ensford, who formerly received favours from Mrs. Baltimore's father, has come many a mile across the country, out of pure good will, to vote for him, with ten or twelve distant voters at his heels; and this, I am free to confess, is a thing that was never taken into our calculation.
Free. That was very wrong tho': we should have taken every thing into our calculation. Shall I lose it, think you? I would rather lose ten thousand pounds.
Mrs. F. Yes, Mr. Freeman, that is spoken like yourself.
Jen. A smaller sum than that, I am almost sure— that is to say, I think I may have the boldness to promise, would secure it to you.
Free. How so?

 
Jen. Mr. Baltimore, you know, has many unpleasant claims upon him.
Free. Debts, you mean: but what of that?
Jen. Only that I can venture to assure you, many of his creditors would have the greatest pleasure in life in obliging me. And when you have bought up their claims, it will be a very simple matter just to have him laid fast for a little while. The disgrace    of that situation will effectually prevent the last days of the poll from preponderating in his favour. It is the easiest thing in the world.
Free. shrinking back from him. Is that your scheme? O fie, fie! the rudest tongued lout in the parish would have blushed to propose it.
Mrs. F. If there should be no other alternative?
Free. Let me lose it then! To be a Member of Parliament, and not an honest man! O fie, fie, fie!
                                         walking up and down much disturbed. Jen. To be sure—indeed it must be confessed, gentlemen have different opinions on these subjects; and I am free to confess, that I have great pleasure, upon this occasion, in submitting to your better judgment. And now, Sir, as I am sorry to be under the necessity of hurrying away from you upon an affair of some consequence to myself, will you have the goodness to indulge me with a few moments attention, just whilst I mention to you what I have done in regard to Southerndown churchyard?
Free. Well, it is my duty to attend to that. Have you ordered a handsome monument to be put
 
up to my father's memory? Ay, to the memory of John Freeman, the weaver. They reproach me with being the son of a mechanic; but I will shew them that I am not ashamed of my origin. Ay,    every soul of them shall read it if they please, “erected to his memory by his dutiful son,” &c.
Jen. Yes, Sir, I have ordered a proper stone, with a neat plain tablet of marble.
Free. A plain tablet of marble! that is not what I meant. I'll have it a large and a handsome thing, with angels, and trumpets, and death's heads upon it, and every thing that a good handsome monument ought to have. Do you think I have made a fortune like a prince to have my father's tombstone put off with a neat plain tablet?
Mrs. F. Now, my dear, you must allow me to know rather more in matters of taste than yourself, and I assure you a plain tablet is the genteelest and handsomest thing that can be put upon it.
Free. Is it?
Mrs. F. Indeed is it. And as for the inscription about his dutiful son and all that, I think it would be more respectful to have it put into Latin.
Free. Very well; if it is but handsome enough I don't care; so pray, Jenkison, write again, and desire them to put a larger tablet, and to get the Curate to make the inscription, with as much Latin in it as he can conveniently put together. I should    be glad likewise, if you would write to the Vicar of Blackmorton to send me the register of my baptism:
 
I shall want it by and by, on account of some family affairs.
Jen. I shall have the greatest pleasure in obeying your commands. Good day!
                                         Exit. Free. Where is the state of the poll, and the list of the outstanding voters?
Mrs. F. Come to my dressing-room, and I'll shew you exactly how every thing stands. You won't surely give up your point for a little—
Free. What do you mean to say?
Mrs. F. Nothing—nothing at all.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE III. Baltimore's house. Enter Baltimore, followed by David, and speaking as he enters. Balt. And so the crowd gave three cheers when good old Humphries tottered up to the hustings to give his vote, as he declared, for the grandson of his old benefactor, Mr. Legender Baltimore? I should have liked to have seen it.
Dav. O, your honour, they gave three such hearty cheers! and old goody Robson clapped her poor withered hands till the tears run over her eyes.
Balt. Did she so? She shall be remembered for this! I saw her little grandson running about the other day barefooted—he shall run about barefooted no longer.—And so my friends begin to wear a bolder face upon it?
Dav. Yes, Sir, they begin to look main pert upon it now.

 
Balt. Well, David, and do thou look pert upon it too. There's something for thee. gives him money. A noise of laughing heard without. Who is that without? is it not Peter's voice? Ho, Peter!
Enter Peter followed by Nat. What were you laughing at there?
Pet. with a broad grin Only, Sir, at Squire Freeman, he, he, he! who was riding up the Back-lane, a little while ago, on his new crop-eared hunter, as    fast as he could canter, with all the skirts of his coat flapping about him, for all the world like a clucking hen upon a sow's back, he, he, he!
Balt. with his face brightening Thou art pleasant, Peter; and what then?
Pet. When just turning the corner, your honour, as it might be so, my mother's brown calf, bless its snout! I shall love it for it as long as I live, set its face through the hedge, and said “Mow!”
Balt. eagerly. And he fell, did he?
Pet. O Lord, yes, your honour! into a good soft bed of all the rotten garbage of the village.
Balt. And you saw this, did you?
Pet. O yes, your honour, as plain as the nose on my face.
Balt. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! and you really saw it?
David aside to Nat. I wonder my master can demean himself so as to listen to that knave's tales: I'm sure he was proud enough once.
Balt. still laughing. You really saw it?
Pet. Ay, your honour, and many more than me saw it. Did'nt they Nat.?

 
Balt. And there were a number of people to look at him too?
Pet. O! your honour, all the rag tag of the parish    were grinning at him. Wa'nt they Nat.?
Balt. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! this is excellent! ha, ha, ha! He would shake himself but ruefully before them still laughing violently.
Pet. Ay, Sir, he shook the wet straws and the withered turnip-tops from his back. It would have done your heart good to have seen him.
Dav. Nay, you know well enough, you do, that there is nothing but a bank of dry sand in that corner with some indignation to Pet.
Balt. impatiently to David. Poo, silly fellow! it is the dirtiest nook in the village.—And he rose and shook himself, ha, ha, ha! laughing still violently. I did not know that thou wert such a humourous fellow, Peter. Here is money for thee to drink the brown calf's health.
Pet. Ay, your honour, for certain he shall have a noggen.
Dav. aside To think now that he should demean himself so!
Enter Mrs. Baltimore. Mrs. B. aside to Balt. Mr. Freeman is at the door: should you wish to receive him? I hurried to give you notice. Will it be disagreeable to you?
Balt. O, not at all. Let him in by all means! to the servants I am at home.
                                         Exeunt servants. Mrs. B.    Now, this is as it should be, my dear Baltimore. I like to see you in this good temper of mind.

 
Balt. Say no more about that. Things go on prosperously with me at present: there is a gleam of sunshine thrown across us.
Enter Freeman and Charles Baltimore . To Free. Good morning, Sir: a very good morning to you.
Free. I thank you, Mr. Baltimore. You see I take, notwithstanding all that is going on between us at present, the liberty of a neighbour.
Balt. smiling. O, no apology, Sir! I am very glad to see you. This is a fine morning for riding on horseback, Mr. Freeman: I hope you have enjoyed it.
Free. aside to Char. How gracious he is! We are certainly come in a lucky moment.
Char. He is in a monstrous good humour certainly; now is the time to manage him.
                                         aside to Free. Free. I am much obliged to you, Sir, for this good neighbourly reception; and I flatter myself you will think I am come on a neighbourly visit too.
Balt. O certainly, Sir, but let us talk a little more this fine morning; it is really a very fine morning    for riding on horseback: How does your crop-eared hunter do?
Free. Eating his oats, I dare say very contentedly. All my horses are pretty well off: I buy the best oats in the country for them, and I pay the best price for them too. They are not to be sure so well lodged as they will be. My
 
architect has just given me in his plan for my new stables: two thousand pounds is the estimate, and I suppose I must allow him to go a little beyond it, to have every thing handsome and complete. That is my way. Will you look at the plan?
                                         taking a plan from his pocket. Balt. drawing back with disgust. I have no taste for architecture.
Free. That is a pity now, for it is really a complete thing. By the bye, are not you going to do something to the roof of your offices soon? They'll be down about you ears presently, and the longer you delay that job, the heavier it will be when it comes. aside to Charles, on seeing Balt. bite his lips and turn away from him What is the matter with him now?
Char. aside Only a little twitching at his heart: it will soon be off again.
Mrs. Balt. aside to Balt. For Heaven's sake    don't let this discompose you; his absurdity makes me laugh.
Balt. aside. Does it? I did not see you laugh, Well, I am a fool to mind it thus. going up to Free. with affected good humour. I am glad to hear your horses are to be lodged in a manner suitable to their owner's dignity. But you are the best horseman too, as well as the best horse-master in the county, though your modesty prevents you from talking of it.
Free. O dear, Sir! I am but middling in that way.
Balt. Pray don't let your diffidence wrong you.
 
What do you jockeys reckon the best way of managing a fiery mettled steed, when a brown calf sets his face through the hedge, and says “Mow?”
Free. Ha, ha, ha! faith you must ask your friend Mr. Saunderson that question. His crop-eared horse has thrown him in the lane a little while ago, and he has some experience in the matter. As for myself, I have the rheumatism in my arm, and I have not been on horseback for a week.
                                         Balt. looks mortified and disappointed. Mrs. B. to Free. He is not hurt, I hope?
Free. No, Madam; he mounted again and rode on.
Char. It was no fault of the horse's neither, if    the goose had but known how to sit on his back. He has as good blood in him as any horse in—
Free. No, no, Charles! not now if you please. going up frankly to Balt. And now, Sir, that we have had our little laugh together, and it is a long time, it must be confessed, since we have had a joke together—ha, ha, ha! I like a little joke with a friend as well as any man—ha, ha, ha!
Balt. retreating as Free. advances. Sir.
Free. But some how you have been too ceremonious with me, Mr. Baltimore, and I'm sure I have always wish'd you to consider me as a neighbour, that would be willing to do you a kind office, or lend you or any of your family a lift at any time.
                                         still advancing familiarly to Balt. Balt. still retreating. Sir, you are very gracious.
Free. So as I said, since we have had our little
 
joke together, I'll make no more preface about it, my good neighbour.
                                         still advancing as Balt. retreats, till he gets him close to the wall, and then, putting out his hand to take hold of him by the buttons, Balt. shrinks to one side and put up his arm to defend himself. Balt. hastily Sir, there is no button here! recovering himself, and pointing in a stately manner to a chair. Do me the honour, Sir, to be seated, and then I shall hear what you have to say.
Free. offended. No, Sir, I perceive that the shorter I make my visit here the more acceptable it will be; I shall therefore say what I have to say,    upon my legs. assuming consequence. Sir, I have by my interest, and some small degree of influence which I believe I may boast of possessing in the country, procured the nomination of a young man, to a creditable and advantageous appointment in the East Indies. If you have no objection, I bestow it upon your relation, here, Mr. Charles Baltimore, of whom I have a very good opinion.
Balt. Sir, I am at a loss to conceive how you should take it into your head to concern yourself in the affairs of my family. If Mr. Charles Baltimore chooses to consider himself as no longer belonging to it, he may be glad of your protection.
Mrs. B. My dear Mr. Baltimore, how strangely you take up this matter! Indeed, Mr. Freeman, you are very good: and pray don't believe that we are all ungrateful.

 
Balt. angrily to Charles. And you have chosen a patron, have you!
Char. I'm sure I did not think—I'm sure I should be very glad—I'm sure I don't know what to do.
Free. Good morning, Madam: I take my leave. slightly to Balt. Good morning.
                                         Exit. Char. I'm sure I don't know what to do.
Mrs. B.    Whatever you do, I hope you will have the civility, at least, to see that worthy man down stairs, and thank him a hundred times over for his goodness.
Char. That I will.
                                         Exit hastily. Mrs. B. Oh, Baltimore! how could you treat any body so, that came to you with offers of kindness?
Balt. striding up and down. What would you have had me do? what would you have had me do, Madam? His abominable fingers were within two inches of my nose.
Mrs. B. Oh, Baltimore, Baltimore!
Balt. Leave me, Madam!                                          Exit Mrs. B. with her handkerchief to her eyes.                                          He still strides up and down; then stopping suddenly to listen. He's not gone yet! I hear his voice still! That fool, with some cursed nonsence or other, is detaining him still in the hall! It is past all endurance! Who waits there? Enter Peter. What, dost thou dare to appear before me with that serpent's tongue of thine, sloughed over with
 
lies? You dare to bring your stories to me, do you? shaking him violently by the collar.
Pet. Oh! mercy, mercy, your honour! I'm sure it was no fault of mine that it was not 'Squire Freeman that fell. I'm sure I did all I could to make it him.
Balt.    Do what thou can'st now, then, to save thy knave's head from the wall.
                                         throwing Peter violently from him, after shaking him well; and exit into an inner room, flapping the door behind him with great force. Pet. after looking ruefully and scratching his head for some time. Well, I sees plainly enough that a body who tells lies should look two or three ways on every side of him before he begins.
                                         Exit very ruefully.

END OF THE SECOND ACT.

 
ACT III. SCENE I. Mrs. Baltimore's dressing-room. She is discovered sitting by a table, looking over papers. Mrs. Baltimore . Well , I have the satisfaction to find that my personal expences, for this last year, have been very moderate; but I am resolved they shall be still more contracted. Though ruin, I fear, cannot be averted, yet, when it does come, I can lift up my unblushing head, and say “this is no work of mine.” No foolish debts of my contracting, Baltimore, shall add to the number of those claims that already so gallingly press upon your proud and irritable mind; and which, perhaps, will, in the end, drive you from the long and fondly retained habitation of your forefathers.
                                         leans pensively upon her arm for some time, then continues to look over more papers. Enter Charles, with a slow sauntering step. Char. Let me see what o'clock it is now. What says my watch to it now? looking at his watch Pest take it! it is but ten minutes since I look'd last; and I could have sworn it was as good three quarters, or, at least, half an hour, as ever clock tick'd, or ever sand-glass ran. yawning and stretching himself. Ah! I find it has been but half an hour of a
 
weary man's reckoning, who still sees two long long periods ycleped hours, lying between him and his dinner, like a dreary length of desert waste before the promised land. yawning and stretching again. My fishing tackle is all broke and destroyed, and    Squire Sapling has borrowed my pointer. I have sat shaking my legs upon the corn-chest, till every horse in the stable is rubbed down, and the groom, happy dog! has gone with his broom in his hand, to sweep out the yard and the kennel. O dear! O dear! O dear! What shall I do?
Mrs. B. rising from the table. Poor man! I pity you with all my heart; but I do think I could contrive to find employment for you, if you are inclined to it.
Char. Yes, Yes! I am inclined to it! Idleness is tiresome enough, God wot! I am inclined to it, be what it will. But what is it tho'? Have you any skanes of thread to wind?
Mrs. B. No, something better than that, Charles.
Char. What, card boxes to paste?
Mrs. B. Something better than that too.
Char. Poetry or advertisements to cut out of the news-paper?
Mrs. B. No, no, something better than all these.
Char. eagerly. It is some new employment then.
Mrs. B. Yes, Charles, a very new one indeed. What would you think of taking up a book and    reading an hour before dinner?

 
Char. disappointed. Pshaw! is that your fine employment? I thought I was really to have something to do. I'll e'en go to the village again, and hear stories from old Margery, about the election and the old family grandeur of the Baltimores.
Mrs. B. Nay, don't put such an affront upon my recommendation. Do take up this book, and try, for once in your life, what kind of a thing reading quietly for an hour to one's self may be. I assure you there are many good stories in it, and you will get some little insight into the affairs of mankind, by the bye.
Char. No, no; no story read, can ever be like a story told by a pair of moving lips, and their two lively assistants the eyes, looking it to you all the while, and supplying every deficiency of words.
Mrs. B. But try it, only try it. You can't surely be so ungallant as to refuse me.
                                         Gives him a book. Char. Well then, since it must be so, shew me where to begin. Some people, when they open a book, can just pop upon a good thing at once, and be diverted with it; but I don't know how it is, whenever I open a book, I can light upon nothing but long dry prefaces and dissertations; beyond    which, perhaps, there may lie, at last, some pleasant story, like a little picture closet, at the end of a long stone gallery, or like a little kernel, buried in a great mountain of shells and of husks. I would not take the trouble of coming at it, for all that one gets.

 
Mrs. B. You shall have no trouble at all. There is the place to begin at. Sit down, then, and make no more objections.
                                         points out the place, and retrns to her papers again.                                          Charles sits down with his book: reads a little with one arm dangling over the back of the chair; then changes his position, and reads a little while with the other arm over the back of the chair; then changes his position again, and, after rubbing his legs with his book hand, continues to read a little more; then he stops, and brushes some dust off his breeches with his elbow. Mrs. B. observing him, and smiling. How does the reading go on?
Char. Oh, pretty well; I shall finish the page presently. he reads a little longer, still fidgeting about, and then starting up from his seat. By the bye, that hound of a shoemaker has forgot to send home my new boots. I must go and see after them.
Mrs. B. What could possibly bring your boots into your mind at this time, I wonder?
Char. It is no wonder at all; for whenever I begin to read, and that is not often, I confess, all the little odd things that have slipp'd out of my head for a month, are sure to come into it then. I must see after the boots tho'.
Mrs. B. Not just now.
Char.    This very moment. There is no time to be lost. I must have them to-morrow at all events.
 
Good bye to you. looking to the window, as he passes on towards the door. Ha! there comes a visitor for you.
Mrs. B. Who is it?
Char. It is Charlotte Freeman, walking very demurely, because she is within sight of the windows.
Mrs. B. I am sorry she is come. I have desired the servants to say I am from home. It is unpleasant to Mr. Baltimore to see any part of that family, and I have promised—no, no, I have—you must go to enquire after your boots, you say. a gentle tap at the door. come in.
Enter Charlotte. Charl. going up affectionately to Mrs. B. I thought you would let me in. curtseys affectedly to Charles.
Mrs. B. Did the servants—
Charl. I saw no servants at all. I stole in by the little door of the shrubbery; for I did not like to go in by the great gate, lest I should meet Mr. Baltimore; and he always looks so strangely at me—But I beg pardon: I see I hurt you by saying so.
Mrs. B. Have you walk'd far this morning?
Charl. Only so far to see you; for you seem'd unwell when I saw you last, and I could not be happy    'till I inquired after you.
Mrs. B. You are very good, my dear Charlotte, I am very well.
Charl. observing her embarrass'd. I fear I come unseasonably.
Char. O, no! We were just wishing for some good girl to come to us; and when you go home again, I shall have the honour of attending you.

 
Charl. affectedly. No, I thank you, there is no occasion; I know my way very well.
Char. But I can shew you a better way, where there are fine sloes and blackberries on the hedges, if you have a mind to gather any. Eating such sweet fruit puts people into good humour, and cures them of affectation.
Charl. disdainfully. I don't know what you mean, Sir, by your sloes and your blackberries, but I suppose you want to shew me the place where you cropt your black puppy's ears the other day, and had your fingers well bit for your pains. I wonder whether you or the puppy were in the best humour upon that occasion.
Char. Faith, the puppy and I were very much the better for a piece of your flounced furbelow, which we found upon the hedge, to bind up our    wounds for us. For you have a great sense of justice, Miss Freeman; you never take any thing off the bushes, without leaving something in return.
Charl. And you, too, Mr. Charles, are a gentleman of great honesty; for you would not take a bit of the poor dog's ears off, without leaving a bit of your own fingers in his mouth as an equivalent.
Mrs. B. How comes it that you two are always quarrelling, and yet always coming in one another's way? to Char. You forget: you must go and see after your boots.
Char. O! I can go to-morrow morning.
Mrs. B. But there is not a moment to be lost: you must have them at all events, you know. No,
 
no; no lingering here: it is an errand of necessity. pointing to the door.
                                         Exit Char. unwillingly. Charl. I'm glad you have sent him away, he is so forward and so troublesome. Perhaps I am a little so myself just now. If I am, don't make any ceremony of sending me off: for I see, my dear Mrs. Baltimore, your spirits are not so good as they used to be. O! if I could do any thing to cheer them!
                                         Looking wistfully at her. Mrs. B. I thank you, my good girl! you are not at all troublesome: you are very pleasant to me; and if it depended upon myself, I should like that    we were often together.
Charl. taking her hand warmly. Should you? Well, and if it depended upon me, I should be always with you. I should go wherever you went, and do whatever you did; and wear the same caps and gowns that you wear, and look just as like you as I could. It is a sad thing that I can get to you so seldom, with those eternal lessons at home, and Mr. Baltimore's stern looks, which almost frighten me when I come here. Do you know I have often thought of writing to you, but then I don't know what to say. It is strange, now! I know ladies, who love one another, write such long letters to one another every day, and yet I don't know what to say.
Mrs. B. And I have known, my dear Charlotte, ladies who did not love one another, do just the same thing.

 
Charl. Have you, indeed? La, that is wonderful! But don't you very often write long letters to the friends you love most?
Mrs. B. Indeed I don't write very often, nor very long letters to any body; and yet I have some friends whom I very dearly love.
Charl. taking Mrs. B's. hand and skipping about her. O! I am so glad to hear that! I thought all    dear friends wrote to one another every day, and that every body knew what to say but myself.— When I am with Mama, I think it will be so difficult to become amiable and accomplished, as I ought to be, that I am quite discouraged; but when I am with you, it appears so pleasant and so easy, that I am put quite into good spirits again.— But, no, no! I do every thing so clumsily! and you do every thing so well!
Mrs. B. Don't be so diffident of yourself, Charlotte: remember you are but fifteen, and I am four-and-twenty.
Charl. I wonder how I shall look when I am four-and-twenty. I'm sure, notwithstanding all the pains both Mama and my Governess take with me, I don't think I look very well at present.
Mrs. B. Nay, my good Charlotte, you look very well always, when you don't attempt to look too well. I hope to see you turn out a very agreeable woman.
Charl. Do you think so? I am to go to public places with Mama next winter; and I have overheard her and my Governess whispering together
 
as if I should have admirers coming about me then. But I don't think I shall. Do you think so?
Mrs. B. smiling. Indeed, I can't say: perhaps    you may, and it is possible you may not; but the less you think of them, the more you will probably have.
Charl. I'm sure I think very little about them. And yet I can't help fancying to myself sometimes, how I shall behave to them.
Mrs. B. Ah! that is but a poor way of employing your fancy. Don't think too much about admirers: they won't admire you the more for that.
Charl. But I won't let them know that I think about them.
Mrs. B. But they will find it out.
Charl. Ha! but I will hold myself very high indeed, and not seem to care a farthing for one of them.
Mrs. B. But they will find it out nevertheless.
Charl. I'm sure I have heard that the young men now-a'-days are no great conjurers.
Mrs. B. That may be very true; but they are all conjurers enough to find that out, though better things should escape their penetration.
Mrs. B. with some alarm. I hear Mr. Baltimore coming.
Charl. You seem uneasy. Will he be angry to find me here?
Mrs. B. much embarrassed.    He will be surprised, perhaps; but he won't come here—he is only passing to the library, I hope.

 
Charl. Ha! but he is coming though! creeping behind Mrs. B. He is just at the door. I will hide myself behind the open door of this cabinet, and do you stand before me till he goes away.
                                         She skulks behind the door of an open cabinet, and Mrs. B. stands up close by her to conceal her completely. Enter Baltimore. Balt. The tide is running against me again; and even my own old servants, I have learnt, at this moment, are swilling themselves at the Cat and Bagpipes, with the damn'd ale and roast-beef of mine adversary. I am going to my attorney immediately; if any person on business should call in my absence, detain him till I return.
Mrs. B. Certainly. I wish you a pleasant ride. I think I shall take a little ramble presently, but shall leave your orders with the servants.
Balt. No, don't go out just now, I beg it of you. That little affected jade of Freeman's is prowling about; and I have already confessed to you, that it disturbs me to see you together.
Mrs. B. Ah! you are prejudiced: you talk without knowing her. She is a sweet tempered, kind hearted girl, and nature meant her for something very different from what she appears to be.
                                         Charlotte behind, catches hold of Mrs. B's hand and kisses it. Balt.    Yes, nature meant her for a clumsy—
Mrs. B. Pray don't delay going to your attorney!

 
Balt. A clumsy hoiden only; and, under the tuition of her ridiculous mother, she assumes all the delicate airs of a fine lady.
Mrs. B. Well, well, go to your attorney: it is all very harmless.
Balt. Well, well, it is all very harmless, if you will; and I have laughed at a thousand little affected fools, nearly as absurd as herself. But when I see those broad features of her father, stamped so strongly by nature upon her common-place countenance, pretending to wear the conscious importance of superior refinement, it provokes me beyond all patience that you should be so intimate with her.
Mrs. B. She is a girl that will very much improve by any reasonable intimacy, and will very soon become like the people she is with.
Balt. Very well, let her be as little with you, then, and as much with her own foolish absurd mother as possible; and the more ridiculous they both are, the greater pleasure I shall have in seeing them any where but in your company. I assure you I have no wish to reform them. It is one of    the few consolations I receive in my intercourse with this man, to see him connected with such a couple of fools.
Mrs. B. O Baltimore! for heaven's sake stay no longer here!
Balt. Pray what is the meaning of this? are you in your senses?

 
Mrs. B. Scarcely, indeed, while you remain here, and talk thus.
Balt. What, does it affect you to this pitch, then? Are you attached to that girl?
Mrs. B. Indeed I am.
                                         Charl. behind, catches Mrs. B's hand again, and kisses it very gratefully. Balt. Well, Madam; I see plainly enough the extent of your attachment to me. walking up and down vehemently. Methinks it should have been offensive to you even to have stroked the very ears of his dog. And that excrescence, that wart, that tadpole, that worm from the adder's nest which I abhor.
Mrs. B. For heaven's sake go away! you kill, you distract me!
Balt. Yes, yes, Madam; I see plainly enough I am married to a woman who takes no common interest, who owns no sympathy with my feelings.
                                         He turns upon his heel in anger to go away, whilst Charlotte springs from her hiding place, and slipping softly after him, makes a motion with her foot as if she would give him a kick in the going out; upon which Balt. turns suddenly round and sees her. She stops short quite confounded: and he, glancing a look of indignation at his wife, fixes his eyes sternly upon Charlotte, who, recoiling from him step by step as he sternly frowns upon her, throws herself at last upon Mrs. B's neck, and bursts into tears. Balt. then turns upon his heel angrily and exit. Charl. sobbing. I shall never be able to look up again as long as I live. There never was any body
 
   like me; for, always when I wish to behave best, something or other comes across me and I expose myself. I shall be so scorn'd and laught at!—I'll never enter this house any more—Oh! oh! oh! Some devil put it into my head, and I could not help it. I'll go home again, and never come a visiting any more.—Oh! oh! oh! I am so disgraced!
Mrs. B. Be comforted, my dear Charlotte! It was but a girl's freak, and nobody shall know any thing of it. But, indeed, you had better go home.
Charl. Yes, I'll go home and never return here any more. But, oh, my dear Mrs. Baltimore, don't despise me!
Mrs. B. No, my dear girl, I love you as much as ever.
Charl. Do you indeed. And yet I must not come to you again. O, I shall wander every morning on the side of the little stream that divides your grounds from ours; and if I could but see you sometimes on the opposite side, calling over to me, I should be happy! It is so good in you to say that you love me; for I shall never love myself any more.
                                         Exeunt Mrs. B. soothing and comforting Charl. as they go off. SCENE II. A small anti-room in Freeman's house. Enter Mrs. Freeman with letters in her hand. Mrs. Free. holding out her letters. Pretty well, I think, for one day's post. I should write to my dear Mrs. Languish too, if my extracts from Petrach were ready.

 
Enter Governess in great haste. Gov. O dear, Madame! I don't know what ting I shall do wit Miss Freeman.
Mrs. Free. What is the matter?
Gov. She come in, since a very little time from her walk, and I believe she be to see Madame Baltimore too, as drooping and as much out of spirit as a pair of ruffles wid de starch out of dem; and she sit down so imitating her. quite frompish, and won't read her lesson to me, though I speak all de good words to her dat I can.
Mrs. Free. Well, go to her again, and I'll follow you immediately, and speak to her myself.
                                         Exit Governess.                                          Mrs. Free. after putting up her letters very leisurely, and looking at one or two of them, goes out. SCENE III. Charlotte is discovered sitting in a disconsolate posture, on a low stool in the middle of the room; the Governess standing by her, endeavouring to soothe and coax her, whilst she hitches away from her fretfully, pushing her stool towards the front of the stage every time the Governess attempts to soothe her. Gov. Do be de good young lady, now, and read over your lesson.
Charl. Can't you let me alone for a moment? I'm not in a humour just now.
Gov. You be in de humours, but in de bad humours, I see. I will put you in de good humours.
 
Look here! Fal, lal, de laddy, daddy singing fantastically. Why don't you smile, Miss? You love dat air, don't you?
                                         putting her hand soothingly on Charlotte's shoulder, and grinning in her face. Charl. shaking off her hand impatiently, turning her back to her, and sitting on the other side of the stool. I don't like it a bit.
Gov. O, but you do! And den de pretty steps I shew'd you: if you would read your lesson, now, we should dance dem togeder. singing and dancing some French steps fantastically. Why don't you look at me? Don't it amuse you, Miss?
Charl. What amusement is it to me, do you think, to see a pair of old fringed shoes clattering upon the boards?
Gov. shrugging her shoulders. Mon Dieu! she has no taste for any of de elegancies putting her hand upon Charlottes's shoulder coaxingly. But if you don't speak well de French and write well de French, de pretty fine gentlemans won't admire you.
Charl. shaking off her hand again, and turning from her to sit on the other side of the stool.    And what do I care for de pretty fine gentlemans, or de pretty fine ladies either? I wish there was not such a thing in the world as either of them.
Gov. casting up her eyes. Mon Dieu! She wish us all out of de world.
Charl. I'm sure I should live an easier life than I do, if there was not—

 
Enter Mrs. Freeman. Mrs. Free. What freak is this you have taken into your head, Miss Freeman, not to read with Ma'moiselle. It won't do, I assure you, to follow your own whimsies thus. You must study regularly and diligently, if you would ever become an elegant and accomplished woman.
Charl. I'm sure I shall never become either elegant or accomplished. Why need I scrawl versions eternally, and drum upon the piano-forte, and draw frightful figures till my fingers ache, and make my very life irksome to me, when I know very well I shall never be better than a poor heedless creature, constantly forgetting and exposing myself, after all? I know very well I shall never be either elegant or accomplished.
Mrs. Free. Why should you suppose so? there is no merit in being too diffident.
Gov.    You should not tink so poor of yourself, Miss. You come on very well. Several lady say dat you are become so like to me in all de airs, and de grace, and de manners, dat you are quite odder ting dan you were.
Charl. No wonder, then, that they laugh at me.
Gov. casting up her eyes. Mon Dieu! She is mad! shall I shut her up in her chamber?
Mrs. Free. Stop a little, if you please: she does not speak altogether from the purpose neither. Come, come, Miss Freeman: rouse yourself up, and have some laudable ambition: the distinction of elegant accomplishments is not to be obtained without industry and attention.

 
Charl. I wish I were with some of the wild people that run in the woods, and know nothing about accomplishments! I know I shall be a blundering creature all my life, getting into scrapes that no body else gets into; I know I shall. Why need I study my carriage, and pin back my shoulders, and hamper myself all day long, only to be laughed at after all?
Mrs. Free. I don't know what you may meet with when you chuse to visit by yourself, Miss Freeman, but in my company, at least, you may be    satisfied upon that score.
Charl. And what satisfaction will it be to me that we are ridiculous together? I would rather be laughed at alone than have people laughing at us both, as they do.
Mrs. Free. with amazement. The creature is beside herself in good earnest! What do you mean child? Who have you been with? Who has put these things into your head? If Mrs. Baltimore can find no better conversation for you than this kind of insolent impertinence, she is poorly employed indeed.
Charl. It was not Mrs. Baltimore that said so.
Mrs. Free. Who said so then? somebody has, I find.
Charl. It was Mr. Baltimore.
Mrs. Free. And you had the meanness to suffer such words in your presence?
Charl. It was not in my presence neither, for he did not see me.

 
Mrs. Free. And where was you then?
Charl. Just behind the train of Mrs. Baltimore's gown, till he should go out again.
Mrs. Free. And so you sneaked quietly in your hiding-place, and heard all this insolent abuse? Mean creature! a girl of any spirit would have    rushed out upon him with indignation.
Charl. And so I did rush out.
Mrs. Free. And what did you say to him?
Charl. sillily I did not say any thing.
Mrs. Free. I hope you resented it, then, by the silent dignity of your behaviour.
Charl. much embarrassed. I'm sure I don't know —I did but give him a little make-believe kick with my slipper, as he went out at the door, when he turned round of a sudden, with a pair of terrible eyes staring upon me like the Great Mogul.
Mrs. Free. A make-believe kick! what do you mean by that?
Charl. La! just a little kick on—on—
Mrs. Free. On what, child?
Charl. La! just upon his coat behind as he went out at the door.
Mrs. F. And did you do that? Oh! it is enough to make one mad! You are just fit to live with the Indians, indeed, or the wild Negroes, or the Hottentots! To disgrace yourself thus, after all the pains I have taken with you! It is enough to drive one mad! Go to your own room directly, and get sixteen pages of blank verse by
 
rote. But I'm sure you are fitter company for the    pigs than the poets.
Charl. How was I to know that he had eyes in the back of his neck, and could know what was doing behind him?
Mrs. Free. He shall have eyes upon all sides of his head if he escape from my vengeance. It shall cost him his election, let it cost me what it will. rings the bell violently. Who waits there? enter a servant. Order the chariot to he got ready immediately. exit servant. I will go to Mr. Jenkison directly. He has already pointed out the means; and I shall find money, without Mr. Freeman's knowing any thing of the matter, to manage it all, well enough.
Charl. La! I'm sure I knew well enough I did wrong; but I did not think of all this uproar about it.
Mrs. Free. Go to your own room, child: I can't abide the sight of you.
                                         Exeunt Mrs. Free. on one side of the stage, and Charl. and Governess on the other.

END OF THE THIRD ACT.

 
ACT IV. SCENE I. A summer apartment in Baltimore's house, with a glass door opened to a lawn. The scene without is seen in the sober light of a calm summer evening, with the sun already set. Enter Baltimore and Mrs. Baltimore from an inner room. Baltimore speaking as they enter. Let us say no more about it, then. I forgive the little deceit of concealment which my temper, become too hasty of late, may, perhaps, justify. I will confess that the irritation excited in my mind by seeing that girl so frequently with you is unreasonable, is capricious. But you must bear with me a little, my Isabella. It is a part of the infirmity that oppresses me: it is the fretted edge of a deep and rankling—Come, come, come! we'll say no more about it. Let us forswear this subject. Let us now talk, even when we are alone, of light and indifferent things.
Mrs. B. Indeed, I believe it will be safest for us, till this passing storm, it will be but a summer storm I hope, is past over our heads. assuming cheerfulness. And now, to begin upon this salutary plan of your's, without loss of time, let me boast to you of the beautiful collection of plants I have
 
nursed with my own hands, in a sly corner of the garden. You have never yet been to see them.
Balt. eagerly. Ay, even there too.
Mrs. B. What do you mean?
Balt. peevishly. Go to! you have heard, as well as I, of the ridiculous expence he has been at    in seeds, and rare plants, and flower-roots, and nonsense; and of the learned botanist he is to pay so liberally for publishing a catalogue of them for the use of the scientific world—All that abominable ostentation. Ha, ha, ha! He does not know a nettle from a crow-foot on his native fields. Ha, ha, ha, ha!—You don't laugh, I think?
Mrs. B. We were to talk, you know, of indifferent things. But I have forgot to tell you of what really is not indifferent: I had a letter from my sister this morning, and, she says, your little godson is quite recovered from the remains of his illness. pauses for an answer.
Balt. nodding his head but not attending to her. Umph.
Mrs. B. coaxingly. She says he has become so chattering, and so playful, it is delightful to see him! And he talks of his godfather very often!
Balt. nodding again. Umph.
Mrs. B. He was always a great favourite of your's.
Balt. breaking out vehemently. If any man but himself had been guilty of half that ridiculous vanity, the dullest fool in the county would have laughed at him.

 
Mrs. B. O dear! still dwelling upon these ideas!
                                         he turns from her, and walks to the bottom of the stage; she sighs deeply, and follows him with her eyes. A long pause. Enter Servet. Serv. to Balt.    Excuse me if I intrude, Sir. And you too, my good lady, bowing very low to Mrs. B. Here is a letter that I received a few moments ago, and I thought it expedient and proper that you should know its contents immediately. gives the letter to Balt.
Balt. Let me see. reads. “An unknown well-wisher thinks it right to inform you, that your friend”—
Serv. He ought to have said patron, Sir. I'm sure, I have always been proud to name you as my patron to every body:—the family of Baltimore has always been such to me.
Balt. Well, well, no matter. reads again “To ruin your friend, 'Squire Baltimore. His adversary”—
Serv. Meaning Freeman, Sir.
Balt. I understand! reads again. “His adversary being busy in buying up the claims of some of his principal creditors. If he would walk long at large, let him walk cautiously.”
Serv. Meaning that he will lay you up, Sir.
Balt. I understand it perfectly.
Mrs. B. O no, no! Some malicious person has written this.
Balt. Permit me, Madam, to speak to my man of business, without interruption.

 
Serv.    No wonder, Sir, that Mrs. Baltimore should think so. He makes such a good show with his actions, that he must set about such things very cunningly.
Balt. Yes, Servet, thou hast always had some notion of his true character.
Serv. To think that there should be such hypocrisy in the world! It grieves, it distresses me!
Balt. Pooh, man! never mind how many hypocrites there are in the world, if he be but found amongst the number.
Serv. Ay, Sir; but if he get you once into prison—
Balt. Will he not be detested for it?
Serv. But if he should take the borough from you—
Balt. Well! and if he should take my life too, would he not be hanged for it?
Serv. To be sure, there would be some satisfaction in that if you could peep through your winding-sheet to see it.
Balt. He will now appear to the world in his true colours: I shall now speak boldly of a determined and palpable wrong: It relieves me from a heavy load. Give me thy hand, my friend Servet; thou has brought me admirable news.
Serv.    But, Sir, we must take care of ourselves. For he is come of such a low, cunning, mean set of people—
Balt. Ha! you know this, do you? You know something of his family?

 
Serv. Yes, I know well enough: and his father every body knows was no better than a—a—a—
Balt. Than a what?—Out with it, man!
Serv. Than a—Than a—
Balt. eagerly. Than a thief? Is that it? O prove to me, only prove to me, that his father was a thief, and I'll give thee all that I have in the world.
Serv. No, not absolutely that—but no better than a paltry weaver.
Balt. disappointed. Pooh! I knew that before.
Serv. Yes, every body knows it, to be sure. But there is no time to be lost: I am so zealous about it, that I can't rest till I have further information. I'll take horse directly and go in quest of it. I know where to enquire, and I shall return to you without loss of time.
Balt. Do so, my good friend, and don't be afraid of bringing back what you will call bad news. I shall not shrink from it.
                                         Exit Servet.                                          turning to Mrs. B. who has been listening to their conversation with great marks of distrust and disapprobation. And so, Madam, you are diffident of all this?
Mrs. B.    It will be impossible at this moment to make you view it in the same light that I do.
Balt. Yes, Madam, I knew it would be so with you. He has bewitched and thrown a veil over the understandings of all men! I have perceived it long. Even from the first of his settling in the neighbourhood, my friends have begun to look on me not as they were wont to do. Even my very
 
tenants and dependants salute me less cheerily. He has thrown a veil over the understandings of all men! He has estranged from me that sympathy and tenderness, which should have supported my head in the day of adversity.
Mrs. B. Ah, my dear Baltimore! It is you who have got a veil, a thick and gloomy veil cast over your mind. That sympathy and tenderness is still the same pressing his hand. And, if the day of adversity must come, you will be convinced of it. But let us for a while give up thinking of these things: let us walk out together, and enjoy the soothing calmness of this beautiful twilight. The evening-star already looks from his peaceful sky: no sound of busy man is to be heard: the bat, and the beetle, and the night-fly are abroad, and the pleasing hum of happy unseen life is in the air.    Come forth, my husband. The shade of your native trees will wave over your head; the turf your infant feet first trod will be under your steps. Come forth, my friend, and more blessed thoughts will visit you.
Balt. No, no; my native trees and my native lawns are to me more cheerless than the dreary desert. I can enjoy nothing. The cursed neighbourhood of one obnoxious being has changed every thing for me. Would he were— clenching his hands and muttering.
Mrs. B. O! what are you saying?
Balt. turning away from her. No matter what.

 
Enter a little Boy from the lawn by the glass-door, running wildly, and frightened. Boy. He'll be drown'd, if nobody runs to save him! He'll be drown'd! he'll be drown'd!
Mrs. B. Has any body fallen into the pond?
Boy. Yes, Madam; into the deepest part of it; and, if nobody does not run to pull him out, he'll be drowned.
Balt. running eagerly towards the glass-door. I'll go. Dost thou know who it is, boy?
Boy. Yes, to be sure, Sir; it is 'Squire Freeman's own self.
                                         Balt. starts, and stops short. Mrs. B. clasping her hands and holding them up to heaven remains in anxious suspence. Balt. after a moment's pause, rushes out quickly. Mrs. B. O God! what will this come to!
                                         throws herself back into a chair, and remains stupid and motionless. The boy stands staring at her. Boy. Are you not well, Ma'am? Shall I call any body? She makes no answer: he still stands staring at her.    She don't speak: she don't look at nothing: I will call somebody. goes to the side-scene, and calls. Who's there, I beseech you? O, hear me, hear me! Who's there, I say?
Enter Housemaid and Coachman. Housem. What a bawling you make here, with your dusty feet, you little nasty jackanapes! How dare you for to steal into a clean house?
Coach. If he be'n't that little devil that put the cracker under my horse's tail, I have no eyes in my head. He is always prowling about: there is never
 
a dog hanged, nor a kitten drowned, in the parish, but he must be after it.
Boy. pointing. Look there: what is the matter with the lady?
Housm. O, mercy on us! my dear good lady? Are you sick Ma'am? or swoonding? or beside yourself? Run, Coachy, stupid oaf! and fetch us something.
Coach. I would run to the farthest nook of the earth if I only knew what to bring. Will burnt feathers, or a little aqua-vitæ do you any good?
Mrs. B. starting up. Do you hear any noise? Are they coming yet? I'll go out myself.
                                         endeavours to go out, but cannot. Housemaid and Coachman support her. Enter David hastily from the lawn. Dav. He is saved, Madam!
Mrs. B. O, what say you, David!
Dav.    He has saved 'Squire Freeman. He threw himself into the deep water, and plashed about his arms lustily, till he caught him by the hair of his head, and drew him to the bank. One minute more had made a dead man of him.
Mrs. B. Who did that? Who caught him by the hair of the head?
Dav. My master, Madam; and a brave man he is.
Mrs. B. holding up her hands in extacy. Thy master! ay, and my husband! and God Almighty's good creature, who has formed every thing good! O, yes! he has made every being with good
 
in it, and will at last make it perfectly so, in some way or other, known only to his wisdom. Ha! I hear a noise on the lawn.
Boy. running out. I must not lose a sight of the drowned man. For he'll be as dropping wet as any corpse, I dare say; for all that there is life in him.
                                         Exit. Mrs. B. I'll go and meet them. I'm strong enough now.
Dav. Let me support you, Madam.
Housem. to Coach. as they go out. La! will he be all wet, do you think, and stretched upon his back?
                                         Exeunt by the glass door into the lawn, Mrs. B. supported by David. Light from a window is now thrown across the path without doors, and discovers Baltimore and servants carrying Freeman into the house by another entry. The scene closes. SCENE II. A room in Baltimore's house. Enter Simeon and David. Dav. Now, my Old Simeon, you'll see your master as hearty, after his ducking, as if he were an otter, and could live either in the water or out of it; though we had some trouble to bring him to his senses at first.
Sim. Ay, do let me go to him quickly. It had been a sorrowful day to this grey head if my master had—

 
Dav. Yes, and if my master had not, as a body may say, put his life in his hand to save him.
Sim. Very true, David, I say nothing against all that: I honour your master for it; thof I must say he has but an ungracious look with him. There is not another gentleman in the neighbourhood, thof I say it myself, that does not stop and say, “How do ye do, Old Simeon?” when he passes me.
Dav. I don't know; I'm sure he used not to be ungracious. All the old folks of the parish used to thrust themselves in his way, as if it had been good for the ague, or an aching in the bones, to say “God bless your honour.”
Sim. That must have been before we came amongst you, then. Ha! here comes his Honour.
                                         Enter Freeman, dressed in a night-gown, with Truebridge and Charles Baltimore. Mrs. Baltimore, at the same time, enters by another door. Sim. going eagerly to his master, and kissing his hand, which Freeman holds out to him. God bless    and preserve your worthy Honour!
Free. I thank you, Simeon: a good God has preserved me. You have not been much alarmed, I hope?
Sim. No, Sir; I heard of your safety before I heard of your danger; but some how or other it came across my heart, for all that; and I could not but think—I could not— pauses and draws the back of his hand across his eyes. But the blessings of the aged and helpless have borne you up: the water could have no commission to hurt you.

 
True. Well said, good Simeon! the blessings of the aged and the helpless are of a very buoyant quality. A cork jacket is nothing to them.
Free. Do my wife and daughter know of it?
Sim. No, please your honour; my mistress is not returned from her visit yet, and my poor young lady is closed up in her room with Madumselle, taking on her book-larning, as I suppose.
Free. I'll go home then, before they know any thing of it. to Mrs. B. My dear Madam, I return you my warmest acknowledgments. You flattered me, that I should have an opportunity, before I leave the house, of thanking, once more, the brave man who has saved my life.
Mrs. B.    He will come to you immediately.
Char. to Mrs. B. Faith! I went to him myself, as you desired me, and he won't come.
Mrs. B. frowning significantly to Char. I have just come from him, and he will be here immediately.
Char. You went too, did you? I couldn't—
Mrs. B. frowns again, and Char. is silent. True. to Free. You had better sit down till he come.
Char. Yes, do sit in this chair in the recess; for you don't like the light in your eyes, I perceive. leading Free. kindly to the chair.
Free. I thank you. You are very good to me, friend Charles. I think you would have lent a helping hand yourself, if you had been in the way, to have saved a poor neighbour from drowning.

 
Char. I should have been a Pagan else. Free. sits down and they all gather round him. Now, my good Sir, it is pleasanter to sit in a dry seat like this, with so many friendly faces round you, than to squash amongst the cold mud and duck-weed, with roaches and eels for your comrades.
Free. Indeed, friend Charles, I sha'n't contradict you.
Enter Baltimore, going directly across the stage towards the opposite door, by which Free. and the others had entered, without perceiving them in the recess. Free. He thinks I am still in the bed-room.
                                         goes behind Balt. and lays his hand kindly upon his shoulder. Balt. Nay, my dear Isabella! let me go by myself!    I would rather encounter him alone, than when you are all staring upon me.
Free. still holding him. Ha, ha, ha! My brave deliverer! I have caught you.
Balt. turning hastily about, and shaking himself loose from his hold. Ha! is it you?
Free. stepping back disappointed. It is me, Sir; and I flattered myself that the overflowings of a grateful heart would not be offensive.
Balt. They are not offensive, Sir; you mistake me. You are too—There is no occasion for all these thanks: I do not deserve them.
Sim. vehemently. Ah, but you do, Sir! and all the country round will thank you too. There is not a soul of them all, thof he might not care a
 
brass penny for you before, who will not fill a bumper to your health now, for saving to them his noble and liberal Honour. O, Sir! the blessings of every body will be upon your head now.
Balt. turning away frowningly from Sim. So, so!
Mrs. B. Old Simeon says very true: every body will bless you.
Balt. turning away from her. This is pleasant, indeed!
Char. I'll be hang'd if every old woman in the parish don't foist you into her next Sunday's prayers,    along with the Royal Family.
Balt. turning away from Char. Must I be beleager'd by every fool?
                                         goes hastily towards the door. Mrs. B. aside, running after him. You will not go away so abruptly?
Balt. aside, to her. Will there be no end to this damned gratitude? about, to Free. Sir, I am very happy—I—I hope you will have a good sleep after this accident; and I shall be happy to hear good accounts of you to-morrow morning.
Free. No, Mr. Baltimore, we must not part thus. My gratitude for what you have done is not to be spent in words only: that is not my way. I resign to you and resign to you, most cheerfully, all my interest in the borough of Westown.
Balt. pauses. True. That is nobly said, Mr. Freeman, and I expected it from you.

 
Char. rubbing his hands, and grinning with delight. I thought so!—I thought it would come to this: he has such a liberal way with him in every thing.
Balt. half-aside to Char. Wilt thou never give over that vile habit of grinning like a dog? going up with a firm proud step to Free. No, Sir; we have entered the lists as fair combatants together, and neither of us, I hope, significantly have taken any unfair advantage of the other. Let the most fortunate    gain the day. I will never receive reward for a common office of humanity. That is not my way mimicking Freeman.
Free. Let me intreat you!
Balt. Mention it no more: I am determined.
Free. It would make me infinitely happy.
Balt. Do me the honour to believe that I speak truth, when I say, I am determined. If you give up the borough, I give it up also.
Free. Then I say no more. I leave with you the thanks of a grateful heart. I should have said, if it had been permitted me, the very grateful affection of an honest heart, that it will never forget what it owes to you but in that place where both affection and animosity are forgotten.
                                         Exit with emotion, followed by Charles and Simeon. Mrs. B. O Baltimore! Baltimore! Will you suffer him to go thus?
Balt. going two or three steps after him, and stopping short. He is gone now.
Mrs. B. No, he is not; you may easily overtake him. Do—for the love of gentleness and charity!

 
Balt. going hastily towards the door, and stopping short again. No, hang it! I can't do it now.
                                         Exit hastily by the opposite side. Mrs. B. shaking her head. I had great hopes from this accident; but his unhappy aversion is, I fear, incurable.
True. Don't despair yet: I prophecy better    things. But do not, my dear Madam, before Baltimore at least, appear so anxious about it. It serves only to irritate him.
Mrs. B. Is it possible to be otherwise than anxious? This unlucky prejudice, gradually gaining strength from every little trivial circumstance, embitters all the comfort of our lives. And Freeman has so many good qualities—he might have been a valuable friend.
True. Very true; he is liberal, good-tempered, and benevolent; but he is vain, unpolished, and, with the aid of his ridiculous wife to encourage him, most provokingly ostentatious. You ought to make some allowance for a proud country gentleman, who now sees all the former dependants of his family ranging themselves under the patronage of a new, and, what he will falsely call, a mean man.
Mrs. B. O, I would make every allowance! but I would not encourage him in his prejudice.
True. The way to reclaim him, however, is not to run directly counter to it. I have never found him so ready to acknowledge Freeman's good qualities as when I have appeared, and have really been
 
half provoked myself with his vanity and magnificence.    When we would help a friend out of the mire, we must often go a little way into it ourselves.
Mrs. B. I believe you are right. Ah! Truebridge! if you had been more amongst us lately, we should not now, perhaps, have been so unhappy. He would have listened more to you than to any other friend.
True. Have good comfort: I don't despair.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE III. Night. An open space before the Blue Posts: the scene dark except where the light gleams from the open door of the house. A noise of drinking and merriment heard within. Enter some of Baltimore's voters, &c. from the house, carrying a table, a bowl of punch and glasses, which they set down in the porch, and place themselves round on the benches at the door. Sailor. Now, messmates, let us set down our bowl here. We have been long enough stow'd in that there close smoky hold, while the fresh air has been playing on the decks. Let us sit down and be merry! I am return'd home in a good jolly time, old neighbours; let us enjoy it.
First Vote. Ay, I remember at our last election, when 'Squire Burton was chosen, we drank a hearty bowl in this very porch, and neighbour Bullock, the tanner, sat as it were in that very corner. Rest his soul! he loved his country, and his king, and his cause, and his candidate, as well as any heart in Old England.

 
Second Vote. Ay, and he was always ready to knock any body down that was not as hearty as himself. That was what I liked in him. That was the true spirit. That was the true roast beef of old England.
First Vote. And he had such a good knack at a toast. Come, stand up, Mr. Alderman. We have drunk already to the ancient family of the Baltimores, give us some other good public toast. You have a good knack at the business too. I would give you one myself, but then I doesn't know how    to do it for want of education.
Ald. standing up conceitedly. May all the king, and the queen, and the royal family, and all the rest of the nobility and members of parliament, serving over them and under us be good; and may all us, serving under them again be—be—be happy and be good too, and be—and be—
Second Vote. Just as we should be.
First Vote. Ay, just so. Very well and very nicely said, Mr. Alderman!
Second Vote. But does nobody drink to the navy of old England.
Ald. Yes, man: stop a little, and I'll have a touch at that too.
First Vote. Ay, do so. I stand up for the British navy; that I do. The sea is our only true friend either by land or by water. Come, give us a sailor's song, Will Weatherall. I have lived upon dry land all my days, and never saw better than a little punt-boat shov'd across the ferry for a sixpence; but some how or other I have a kindness for every
 
thing that pertains to the great salt sea, with all the ships, and the waves roaring, and all that; and whenever I sees a good heart of oak seated at an alehouse door with his glass in his hand, my heart    always turns to him, and there should be a hundred men besides. Give us a song, man.
Sailor. That I will. Hang me if thou does'n't deserve to feed upon biscuit.
SONG.

Merry mantling social bowl,
Many a cheerful kindly soul
   Fills his glass from thee:
Healths go round, care is drown'd,
Every heart with lighter bound
   Gen'rous feels and free.

Cann and beaker by thy side,
May'st thou oft' in flowing pride
   Thus surrounded be:
And shame befal the narrow mind,
That to a messmate proves unkind,
   Who once hath fill'd his glass from thee!

Whate'er our state, where'er we meet,
We'll still with kindly welcome greet
   The mate of former jollity:
Far distant, in a foreign land,
We'll give to all a brother's hand
   That e'er have filled their glass from thee.
 
Enter Margery in great fury. Mar. Dash down your bowl, and break all your glasses in shivers? Are you sitting singing here, and 'Squire Baltimore hurried away to prison    by his vile rascality creditors? Shame upon your red chops! Who pays for the liquor you are drinking?
All. You're wrong in the head, Margery.
Mar. Ye're wrong in the heart, and that's a worse thing, ungrateful punch swillers! You would be all up on end in a moment else; for I saw them lay their detestable paws upon him with mine own eyes. Rise up every skin of you, or I'll break the bowl about your ears! I'll make the liquor mount to your noddles, I warrant you!
All. starting up. Which way did they go?
Mar. Come, follow me and I'll shew you. Let them but come within reach of my clench'd fist, and I'll teach them to lay hands upon his honour! An esquire and a gentleman born.
                                         Exeunt, every body following her with great noise and hubbub.

END OF THE FOURTH ACT.

 
ACT V. SCENE I. A vaulted passage in a prison. Enter Keeper, with several Turnkeys bearing pots of porter, &c. for the prisoners. Keep. calling to somebody without. Take another pot of porter to the dog-stealer in the north ward, and a Welsh rabbit to his comrade. to another who enters with a covered dish. Where have you been all this time?
st Turn. Waiting on the rich debtor in the best chamber; he has fallen out with his stew'd carp, because the sauce of it be'nt cook'd to his liking.
Keep. I'm sorry for that: we must spare no pains upon him.
Enter d Turnkey. d Turn. holding out a small jug. Come, come, this won't do. Transportation-Betty says, nothing but true neat Hollands for her; and this here gin you have sent her be'nt fit for a gentlewoman to drink.
Keep. Yes, yes; travell'd ladies are woundy nice. However, we must not quarrel with her neither: take it to the poor author in the debtor's ward; it will be good enough for him.

 
Enter Truebridge. True. What part of the prison is Mr. Baltimore in?
Keep. I'll shew you, Sir; follow me.
True. I thought to have found him in your own house. In the common prison?
Keep.    It is his own fault, Sir; he would go no where else; and the more miserable every thing is about him, the better he likes it. His good lady could scarcely prevail upon him to let us set a couple of chairs in his room.
True. Has she been long here?
Keep. Better than an hour I should think.
True. Does he seem much affected?
Keep. Anan, Sir?
True. I mean, much cast down.
Keep. O, Lud; no, Sir! I dare say not; you know people are used to such things every day.
True. Very true, Mr. Keeper, I forgot that.— Show me the way.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE II. A prison. Baltimore is discovered sitting in a thoughtful posture, with Mrs. Baltimore resting her arm on the back of his chair, and observing him attentively. Balt. after starting up with alacrity, and walking several times up and down. And they are calling out, as they go thro' the streets, that I am a true Baltimore, and the son of their old benefactor?

 
Mrs. B. They are, indeed. The same party that assembled to attempt your rescue, are still parading about tumultuously, and their numbers are continually increasing.
Balt. That's right! The enemy, I hope, has heard the sound of it round his doors: they have bid him a good morrow cheerily.
Mrs. B. I don't believe they suspect him yet, for it is too bad to imagine.
Balt. exultingly. But they will all know it soon. All the world will know it. Man, woman, and child will know it; and even clothed in the very coats his ostentatious bounty has bestow'd upon them, the grey-headed labourers will curse him. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! How many chaldron of coals, and hogsheads of ale, and well fatten'd oxen will, in one untoward moment, be forgotten by those ungrateful hinds! Ha, ha, ha! The very children will call to him as he passes by. Methinks I tread lightly on the floor of this dungeon, with the step of an injured man who rises from the grasp of oppression.    Raise thy drooping head, my Isabella: I am a thousand times more happy than I have been: all mankind will sympathize with me now.
Mrs. B. Every honest breast, indeed, must detest baseness and hypocrisy.
Balt. Ay, thou speak'st with some energy now. Come to my heart! there will be sympathy between us. Now, thou art the wife of Baltimore! But oh! my Isabella! a poor man's wife has many duties to fulfil.

 
Mrs. B. None that I will not most cheerfully fulfil.
Balt. Ah! thou art a fair flower planted on an ungracious soil, and I have nursed thee rudely.
Mrs. B. O, no! you were most kind and gentle once.
Balt. And I will be so again, Isabella: for this viper gnaw'd at my heart, and I could be gentle to nothing; not even to thee. But my heart feels lighter now; I will be rough to thee no more.
Enter Truebridge. Ha! my friend! good morning to you! Nay, nay: taking his hand frankly. don't be afraid to look at me: I wear no desponding face upon it. pointing to the bare walls of his prison. You see what a happy thing it is to have a liberal, generous,    magnificent rival to contend with. Have you seen any of my good noisy friends on your way?
True. Yes, crowds of them; and I really believe this arrest will gain you your election. There is something in man that always inclines him to the side of the oppressed.
Balt. Ay, by God! and the savage feels it more strongly than the philosopher.
True. He was always a ridiculous ostentatious fellow; but if Freeman has thought to ruin your cause by the unworthy means you hint at, he is the greatest fool as well as the greatest knave in the community.
Balt. ironically. Don't be too severe upon him! he has been bred to turn his money to good account,
 
you know: a purchased debt is his property as well as a bale of broadcloth; and he has a great many charitable deeds and bountiful donations to put into the balance against one little underhand act of unmanly baseness.
True. Hang all his bountiful donations! If he has done this, I will curse him by the hour-glass with any good fellow that will keep me company.
Balt. Nay, nay, nay! you are warm, Truebridge. You are of an irritable disposition. You have no    charitable allowances to make for the failings of good people. Ha, ha, ha!
Enter Turnkey. Turn. Mr. Freeman begs to be admitted to see Mr. Baltimore.
Balt. stretching out his arm vehemently. Does he, by my conscience! to True. What think you of this?
True. If things are as we suspect, it does, indeed, exceed all ordinary calculations of effrontery.
Balt. to Turn. Let him be admitted. exit Turn. Now we shall see the smoothness of his snake's skin; but the switch, not the sword, shall scotch it. walks hastily up and down.
Enter Freeman. Balt. stopping short upon his entrance, and assumes an ironical respect. Good morning, worthy Sir. You are the only man in England, I may say in Europe, nay, I will say in the whole habitable globe, for you love magnificence, Mr. Freeman, whose dauntless
 
confidence could have been wound up to the steady intrepidity of such a visit.
Free. simply. O, no, my friend, don't praise me more than I deserve. In courage to run to the assistance of a friend, you yourself have set me the example; and my character, I hope, will never be found deficient in any thing that becomes a good neighbour, and an honest man.
Balt. smiling sarcastically.    Certainly, Sir; be at all pains to preserve, in the public opinion, your invaluable character. I would really advise you to have a certificate of all your eminent virtues drawn up, and sign'd by every housekeeper in the parish. Your wonderful liberalities in worsted hose and linsey-woolsey petticoats; your princely subscriptions for bridges and market-places; and your noble donations to lying-in hospitals, have raised your reputation over the whole country: and if the baseness of treacherously entrapping a fair and open rival, whom you profess'd to respect, can throw any shade upon your sublime virtues, you have only to build a tower to the parish church, or a new alms-house, and that will set every thing to rights again, aside to True. Look how he draws in his detestable mouth, and stares upon me like a cat?
Free. I now perceive, Sir, the point of your discourse, and I forgive every thing that it insinuates. I might say many things, but there is just one simple answer I will return to it. All my fortune is at this moment at your disposal. You shall now be a free unencumber'd man, owing no man any
 
thing. For how can you be said to be indebted to one who owes even his own life to you. To tell    you this, was my errand here.
Balt. shrinking back, and then recovering himself with proud disdain. And I, noble Sir, have one simple answer to return to you: I will rather remain in this prison till the hand of death unbolt my door, than owe my enlargement to you. Your treachery and your ostentatious generosity are equally contemptible.
Free. On the word of an honest man, I have had no knowledge of this shameful arrest.
Balt. And on the word of a gentleman, I believe you not.
Free. Will you put this affront upon me?
Balt. smiling maliciously. Only if you are obliging enough to bear it. Do entirely as you please. aside to True. turning away contemptuously from Free. See how like a sneaking timid reptile he looks.
                                         walks up and down proudly. Mrs. B. much alarmed to Free. O, leave him! leave him! You must not speak to him now: he knows not what he says.
True. aside to Free. Go away for the present, Mr. Freeman, and I will call upon you by and bye. If you are an honest man, you are a noble one.
Free. impressively. In simple truth, then, I am an honest man; and I shall be glad to have some discourse with you whenever you are at leisure.
                                         Exit.
 
Balt. stopping short in his walk and looking round.    Is he gone? to Free. What did you think of that? Was it not admirable? endeavouring to laugh but cannot. The devil himself will now appear a novice in hypocrisy.
True. Faith! Baltimore, I cannot think him guilty: he wears not the face of a guilty man.
                                         Baltimore's countenance falls: he turns away abruptly from Truebridge and walks up and down in disorder. Mrs. B. perceiving Freeman's hat on the ground, which he had dropt in his confusion. Mr. Freeman has left his hat behind him.
                                         As she stoops to lift it Balt. runs furiously up to her and prevents her. Balt. Touch not the damned thing, or I will loath thee! Who waits without? hollo! Turnkey! Enter Turnkey; and he, giving the hat a kick with his foot, tosses it across the stage. Take away that abomination, do!
                                         Exit hastily into an inner apartment. True. Don't lose hopes of fair weather, my dear Madam, tho' we are now in the midst of the storm. Follow and sooth him, if it be possible, and I'll go in the mean time to Freeman.
                                         Exeunt severally.
 
SCENE III. An open scattered street in a small country town. Enter Jenkison and Servet by opposite sides; and are going to pass without observing one another. Serv. calling to Jenk. Not so fast, Mr. Jenkison, I was just going to your house.
Jenk. And I was just going to do myself the pleasure to call at your's.
Serv. And you was glad to go quickly along, I believe. It would neither be pleasant nor safe for you, perhaps, to meet the new member in his chair, with all his friends round him. “Baltimore for ever!” would not sound very pleasantly in your ears. Ay, Mr. Jenkison! You have made a fine hand of this business for a man of your pretensions in the profession.
Jenk. I believe, Mr. Servet, I may be permitted to assume to myself, without the imputation of vanity, as much professional dexterity in this affair as the most able of my contemporaries could have brought into the service. Every thing has been done that the very nicest manœuvres of the law would admit of. Who could have thought of a rich friend, from nobody knows where, paying Baltimore's debts for him? Who could have thought of those fools taking him up so warmly upon his imprisonment, in manifest contradiction to the old proverb, that “rats and vermin leave a falling    house?” Who could have thought so many of Mr.
 
Freeman's friends would have stay'd from the poll, too, after solemnly promising their votes? I am sure you are too polite not to do me the justice to confess that these things were not to be counted upon. A pinch of your snuff, if you please: you keep the best rappee of any gentleman in the county.
Serv. But what can you say for yourself in the present bussiness, Mr. Jenkison? I'm sure, my client, Mr. Baltimore, has given you advantages enough, if you had known how to use them. Since his quarrel with Mr. Freeman in the prison, have not you and I gone between them with at least half-a-dozen of messages, unknown to their friends? and nothing but a paltry meeting with pistols to come of it after all! It is a disgrace to the profession.
Jenk. What could I have done, Mr. Servet?
Serv. What could you have done! Has not my client by my mouth, told your client in pretty plain terms, in return to all his amicable advances, that he is a liar, and a hypocrite, and a knave, and a coward; and with but very little difficulty on your part a kick or a cudgel might have been added: and do you ask me what was to be done with all this? A meeting with pistols, indeed! It is a disgrace to the profession.    I once procured for a smug-faced client of mine a good douse o' the chops, which put a couple of hundred pounds into his pocket; enabling him thereby to run off with a rich heiress, and make his fortune, as you may well say by a stroke. As for myself I put, of course, double the sum in my own.

 
Jenk. Do me the favour to believe, my worthy Sir, that I have always looked up to your superior abilities with the profoundest respect. But have a little patience: and do me the honour to suppose I am not altogether a novice. We may have a duel first and a law-suit afterwards. I suppose we shall have the pleasure of meeting at the place and hour appointed?
Ser. Never doubt that. But I hear the crowd coming this way. some of the crowd begin to enter, and a great noise is heard at a distance. Let us avoid them, and talk further of this matter as we go.
                                         exeunt Jenk. and Serv. Enter more of the crowd. First Mob. Well, I can't say but it was a rare speech.
Second Mob. And very nicely delivered.
First Mob. Ay, he is a nice man.
First Woman. And such a sweet-faced gentleman. He'll stand by his king and country, I warrant ye.
First Mob. to third Mob.    But you lost it all, neighbour Brown, you was so long of coming. “Gentlemen,” said he, and he bowed his head so, “the honour you have this day preferred me to”—
Second Mob. No, no, man; “that you have conferred upon me.”
First Mob. Well, well, where's the difference? “I shall ever consider upon”—
Second Mob. Reflect upon.
First Mob. Did not I say reflect upon? “With— with great joy” no “great”—I don't know very
 
well; but he meant, as one should say, as how he would think upon us with good-will. And then, quoth he,—but first of all you know, he said, stretching out his hand so, that “the confidence imputed to him.”
Second Mob. Tut, man! reposed upon him.
First Mob. Did not I say so as plain as a man could speak?—Was a trust that, with the greatest scrupulousness of regard—That is to say, you know, that he won't sell his vote for a pension: nor give away our poor little earnings to feed a parcel of lazy placemen and courtiers, Lord, help us! And that he won't do.
Third Mob. No, no! I'll answer for him. Why    I have heel-pieced his shoes for him when he was no bigger than a quart-pot.
First Mob. But what pleased me most of all was, when he waved his hand in this fashion, and said, “Gentlemen, It has always been the pride and boasting—
Second Mob. Pride and boast.
First Mob. No, indeed; I say pride and boasting, Thomas Truepenny; have not I a pair of ears in my head as well as you?
Second Mob. Well, well, boasting be it then!
First Mob. Yes, “boasting of this honourable borough to support its own dignity and independency against all corruptful encroachments.” And then he went on to tell us, you know, all about the glory and braveness of our ancestors—O! let him alone for a speech! I'll warrant ye, when he stands
 
up among the great men in that there house of parliament, he'll set his words together in as good a fashion as the best of them.
Second Mob. Yes, to be sure, if he does it in the fashion that you have been a-shewing us.
Second Woman. O la! there he comes, and the pretty chair and all the pretty ribbons flying about! Do come and let us run after him.
                                         Enter a great crowd, and Baltimore carried in a chair ornamented with boughs and ribbons, &c. on the back ground, and crossing over the bottom of the stage exeunt with acclamations: the first crowd joining them. SCENE IV. An open space in a forest surrounded with thickets and fern, &c. Enter Baltimore and Servet, looking out several ways as they enter. Serv. Now I do see them a-coming!
Balt. You have discovered them half-a-dozen of times already since we entered the forest: Are they at hand?
Serv. still looking out thro' some bushes. They an't far off, but I don't know how it is they keep always a-moving and always a-moving, and yet they never come nearer.
Balt. He stops to take heart perhaps.
                                         smiling with malicious satisfaction. Serv. Yes, poor man, ha, ha, ha! his mind is disturb'd enough, no doubt. But you, Sir, are so composed! You have the true strong nerves of a
 
gentleman. Good blood always shews itself upon these occasions. looking out again. Yonder now, I could tell you, even at this distance, by that very manner of waving his pocket handkerchief that he is in a devilish quandary.
Balt. Indeed! dost thou already discover in him the disturbed gait of a frightened man? This is excellent!—Let me look! let me look! looking thro' the bushes with great satisfaction and eagerness. Where, Servet?
Serv. Look just between the birch-tree and the little gate.
Balt. peevishly. Pooh, nonsense! It is a colt    feeding amongst the bushes, and lashing off the flies with his tail.
                                         As they are looking, enter Freeman and Jenkison behind them. Free. Good morning, gentlemen: I hope we have not kept you waiting.
Balt. I am here, Sir, at your request, to give you the satisfaction you require, and I have waited your time without impatience.
Free. Ah, Mr. Baltimore! it is a cruel necessity that has compell'd me to require such a meeting as this from a man to whom I owe my life. But life, with contempt and degradation in the eye of the world annex'd to it, is no benefit: you have cruelly compell'd me—
Balt. Make no apology, Sir, for the invitation you have given me to this place: it is the only one in my life that I have received from you with pleasure, and obey'd with alacrity.

 
Free. You will regret, perhaps, when it is too late, that some explanation, on your part, did not prevent—
Jenk. Yes, Sir, some little explanation of your words. The most honourable gentleman is always free to confess that words are not always intended to convey the meaning they may obviously seem to express.
Balt. contemptuously. I make no doubt, Sir, that    you can find a great many different meanings to the same words. A lie may be easily turn'd into a slight mistake, or a villain into a gentleman of deep and ingenious resource, in your polite dictionary: but I am a plain unpolish'd man, Mr. Jenkison, and I have but one sense in which I offer what I have said by the mouth of my friend here pointing to Serv. to Mr. Freeman, and to the world, unretracted and unexplain'd. aside to Serv. Does he not look pale?
Serv. O, very pale.
Free. Then, Mr. Baltimore, you compel a man of peace to be what he abhors.
Balt. I am sorry, Sir, this business is so disagreeable to you: the sooner we dispatch it, in that case, the better. Take your ground. aside to Serv. Does he not look very pale?
Serv. aside. O, as white as a corpse.
Free. I believe you are right to Serv. and Jenk. Mark out the distance, gentlemen: you know what is generally done upon these occasions, I am altogether ignorant. You seem to be ready, Mr. Baltimore, and so am I.

 
Serv. aside to Balt. He would bully it out now, but he is in a great quandary for all that.
Balt. aside to Serv. angrily.    No, hang him, he is as firm as a rock! aloud to Free. I am perfectly ready also, Sir. Now take your fire.
Free. No; I cannot call you out, and take the first fire myself: this does not appear to me reasonable.
Balt. You are the insulted man.
Free. Yes, but I am the challenger, and must insist on first receiving your's.
                                         They take their ground, and Balt. is about to fire, when Truebridge and Charles Baltimore break in upon them thro' the bushes. True. seizing Baltimore's arm. Hold your rash hand, madman, and make not yourself accursed!
Balt. What do you mean, Truebridge?
True. pointing to Free. That there stands before you the unknown friend—
Free. to True. eagerly. Hold, hold! remember your promise: I have bound you to it.
True. But you release me from that promise by effecting this meeting unknown to me, when I had every claim upon your confidence. I will not hold my tongue.
Balt. For God's sake, then, tell the worst thou hast got to say, for I am distracted!
True. There stands before you, then, that unknown friend; the great uncle of your wife, as I suffered you to suspect, who has paid all your debts, open'd your prison doors, and even kept
 
   back his own friends from the poll to make you the member for Westown.
                                         Balt. staggers back some paces, and the pistol falls from his hand. Char. capering with joy. O, brave and noble! this makes a man's heart jump to his mouth! Come here, Mr. Spitfire, taking up the pistol. we shall have no more occasion for you.
Balt. giving Charles an angry push as he stoops down close by him to lift the pistol Get away, damn'd fool! Does this make you happy?
True. Fie, Baltimore! It is not manly in thee to be thus overcome.
Balt. If thou had'st lodged a bullet in my brain I had thank'd thee for it.
True. And is there nothing, then, within your breast that is generously called forth to meet the noble gratitude of a liberal mind? A mind which has strove to acquit itself of the obligation that it owes to you, and to make you ample reparation for an injury which you have suffered on his account, tho' entirely unknown to him. There is nothing in your breast that comes forth to meet such sentiments as these. Injuries and oppression are pleasing to your mind; generosity and gratitude oppress it. Are these the feelings of a brave man? Come, come! taking his arm gently.
Balt. Hold, away! I am fool'd, and depress'd,    and degraded!
                                         turns away from him abruptly. True. Well, then, battle out with your own proud spirit the best way you can. Freeman, I must agree to it, is a magnificent, boasting, ostentatious
 
fellow; and devil take me if I could bear to have any reciprocity in good offices with him myself?
Balt. By the Lord! Truebridge, I'll run you thro' the body if you say that again.
True. Ha! come nearer to me then. I shall now tell Freeman of an obligation he owes to you, Baltimore, and we shall see if he bears it more graciously.
Free. I owe my life to his courage.
True. Yes, but it is not that. Come nearer me, Baltimore. to Free. You were anxious, I believe, to erect a monument to the memory of your father.
Free. Yes, Sir; and Mr. Jenkison has written for me to have it accomplish'd.
True. And also, at the same time, to have a certificate of your baptism?
Free. Yes, Sir, some family business required it; but I have yet received no answer.
True. No; the clergyman to whom you wrote is my particular friend; he has made the enquiries you desired; and the result is of such a nature that    he has thought it necessary to be the bearer of it himself.
Free. What may it be?
True. He is at my house, and will inform you of every thing minutely; but, just at this moment, I can't help telling you myself, that to erect a monument to the memory of your father is unnecessary,
 
as Mr. Baltimore has already piously saved you that trouble.
Free. What do you mean by that? I am a man of peace, but I will tear the heart out of any one who dares to insult my father's memory.
True. He has done it in sober piety.
Free. What! erected a monument for my father in the parish church of Southerndown?
True. No, in the parish church of Westown.
Free. My father is not buried there.
True. Ay, but he is, indeed. One church, one grave, one coffin contains both your father and his.
Free. O, God! what is this?
                                         Balt. starts and puts his hands before his eyes. Char. I would give a thousand pounds that this were true.
True to Char. Thou hast lost thy money then. But prithee be quiet, Charles!
                                         Jenkison and Servet look ruefully upon one another. Free. after a pause. Was not my mother the    wife of Freeman?
True. Yes; and, I believe, his faithful wife; but she was your mother first.
Free. She was seduced and betray'd?
True. We will not, if you please, enter into that part of the story at present. My account says, that she married, after bringing you into the world, a poor but honest man: that the late Mrs. Baltimore discovered her some years afterwards, sympathised with her misfortune, and from her own pin-money, for the family affairs were even then very much involved,
 
paid her a yearly sum for the support and education of her son, which laid the foundation of his future wealth and prosperity.
Balt. stepping forward with emotion. Did my mother do this?
True. Yes, Baltimore, she did: till Mrs. Freeman, inform'd of the state of your father's affairs, with an industry that defied all pain and weariness, toil'd night and day to support the aspiring views of her son, independent of a bounty which she would no longer receive, tho' it was often and warmly press'd upon her.
Free. with emotion. And did my mother do that?
True.    She did, indeed.
Free. Then God bless her! I do not blush to call myself her son.
True. stretching out his hands to Balt. and Free. Now, don't think that I am going to whine to you about natural affection, and fraternal love, and such weaknesses. I know that you have lived in the constant practice of all manner of opposition and provocation towards one another for some time past: you have exercised your tempers thereby, and have acquired habits that are now, perhaps, necessary for you. Far be it from me to break in upon habits and gratifications! Only, as you are both the sons of one father, who now lies quietly in his grave, and of the good women, for I call them both good, who bore no enmity to one another, tho' placed in a situation very favourable for its growth,
 
do for the love of decency take one another by the hand, and live peaceably and respectably together!
                                         taking each of them by the hand. Balt. shaking off True. Get away, Truebridge, and leave us to ourselves.
                                         True. retires to the bottom of the stage, and makes signs for Jenk. Serv. and Char. to do so too: they all retire.                                          Balt. and Free. stand looking at one another for some time without speaking. Balt. then drawing nearer to Free. clears his voice, and puts on the action of one who is going to speak emphatically; but his energy is suddenly dropt, and he turns away without speaking. He draws near him a second time, clears his voice again, and speaks in broken accents. Balt. I have been to you, Mr. Freeman, most unreasonable and unjust. I have—I have—my behaviour has been stern and ungracious—But— but my heart—O! it has offended beyond—beyond even the forgiveness of a—of a—
Free. eagerly.    Of a what, Mr. Baltimore?
Balt. Of a brother.
Free. God bless you for that word! Are you the first to pronounce it? Yes, I will be a brother, and a father, and a friend, and an every thing to you, as long as there is breath in my body. And tho' we do not embrace as brothers—
Balt. rushing into his arms. Ah! but we do! we do! most heartily! But I have something to say,
 
Let me lean against this tree for a little.
                                         leans his back against a tree. Free. What would you say?
Balt. in a broken voice. I am—I am where I ought not to be. Your generosity imposed upon you—the borough of Westown is vacant.
Free. No; it is filled with the man for whom I will henceforth canvass thro' thick and thin every shire, town, and village in the kingdom, if need be: the borough of Westown is not vacant.
Balt. endeavouring to open his waistcoat and collar. My buttons are tight over my breast: I cant't get this thing from my throat.
                                         Free. attempts to assist him. True. running forward from the bottom of the stage. Let me assist you, Baltimore.
Balt. No, no, hold away: he will do it for me. I feel the touch of a brother's hand near my breast, and it does me good.
True. exulting. Ha! is it thus with you? Then    we have triumphed! conquest and victory!
Char. tossing up his hat in the air. Conquest and triumph and victory! O it is all right now!
True. Yes, Charles, thou may'st now be as boisterous as thou wilt.
Jenk. aside to Serv. We have made but a bad business of it here.
Ser. aside to Jenk. It was all your fault.
                                         they quarrel in a corner, whilst Free. and True. are occupied with Balt.; and Charles runs exultingly about, tossing his hat in the air.
 
Enter nearly at the same time, by opposite sides, Mrs. Baltimore and Mrs. Freeman with Charlotte. Mrs. B. alarmed. O, you are wounded, Baltimore.
True. No, no! there are no wounds here: we are victorious.
Mrs. B. Over whom?
True. Over a whole legion of devils! or, at least, over one great black one, who was as strong and as stubborn as a whole legion.
Mrs. B. joyfully. Ha! and is he overcome at last? Let me rejoice with you, my Baltimore! We have found our lost happiness again.
Balt. We have found something more, my dear Isabella: we have found a brother.
                                         presenting Free. to Mrs. B. Mrs. B. Yes, I knew you would find in this worthy man a friend and a brother.
Balt. Nay, nay! you don't catch my meaning: he is the son of my father.
Mrs. Free. What does he say?
Char.    The son of his father! My ears are ringing.
Mrs. B. after a pause of surprize. In sober earnest truth? clasping her hands together. O thank heaven for it! holding out her hand to Free. My friend and my brother.
Balt. to Free. Yes, she has always been your friend.

 
Free. kissing her hand with emotion. I know she has, and I have not been ungrateful. presenting Mrs. Free. to Mrs. B. and Balt. And here is one who has not been so much your friend as she will be. Her too warm interest in a husband's success misled her into an error which she sincerely repents.
Mrs. Free. affectedly. Mrs. Baltimore has too much sensibility herself not to pardon the errors it occasions in others.
Mrs. B. taking her hand. Be assured, my dear madam, I can remember nothing with resentment that is connected with our present happiness.
Serv. aside to Jenk. And Mrs. Freeman is shaking hands with them too! O! there will be a stagnation to all activity! there will not be a law-suit in the parish for a century to come!
Jenk. aside. Well, how could I help it? Walk this way for God's sake or they will hear us.
                                         Jenk. and Ser. retire to the bottom of the stage quarrelling. Mrs. B. looking round.    But there is something wanting for me still: My dear Charlotte—
Charl. coming forward and jumping into Mrs. B.'s arms. Yes, I was just waiting for this. O! I shall love you, and live with you, and hang about you continually! My sister, my aunty, my cousin! how many names may I call you?
Mrs. B. As many as you please. But there is another name that you must learn to say: leading her up to Balt. do you think you can look gravely
 
in this gentleman's face and call him uncle? Nay, don't be frightened at him. to Balt. Poor girl, she has stood in awe of you intolerably.
Balt. embracing her. She shall stand in awe of me no more; and, if ever I look sternly upon her again, I will cheerfully submit to whatever correction she may think proper to inflict upon me.
                                         smiling significantly. Char. holding out his hand to Charlotte. And is there no such thing as cousins to be made out of all this store of relationship.
Charl. O yes! there is a lazy, idle, good-for-nothing thing called a cousin, that we must all have some little kindness for, as in duty bound, notwithstanding.
Free. Don't mind her, my friend Charles: you shall be lazy and idle no longer. I'll find employment for you: I'll rouse you up and make a man of    you. There is not a peer of the realm has it in his power to do more for his relations than I have. And by heaven I will do it too.
True. laying his hand on Freeman's shoulder. Gently now, my good Sir! we know all that perfectly well.
Balt. aside to True. O, let him boast now, he is entitled to it.
True. aside to Balt. giving a nod of satisfaction. Ay, all is well, I see. aloud. Now, my happy friends, if I have been of any use amongst you, shew me your gratitude by spending the rest of the
 
day at my house, with my good friend the Vicar of Blackmorton; who has many things to tell you.
Mrs. Free. aside to True. As I am the elder brother's wife, the foolish ceremony of my taking precedence of Mrs. Baltimore will be settled accordingly; and I'm sure it will distress me extremely.
True. aside to her. Don't distress yourself, Madam; there is a bar to that, which you shall have the satisfaction of being acquainted with presently. Pray don't let your amiable delicacy distress you. aloud. Now let us leave this happy nook. But I am resolved to have a little bower erected in this very spot, where we will all sometimes retire, whenever we find any bad dispositions stirring within us, with that book in our hands, which says, “If    thy brother offend thee seven times in a day”— No, no, no! I must not repeat sacred words with an unlicensed tongue: but I will bless God in silence for restoring a rational creature to the kindly feelings of humanity.
                                         Exeunt. Back matter

THE END.
NOTES

ST MOB
ST TURN
D MOB
D TURN
ALD
ALL
BALT
BALTIMORE
BES
BOY
CHAR
CHARL
CHARLES
COACH
COM
COUNTRYMAN
CROUD
DAV
DAVID
FIRST MOB
FIRST VOTE
FIRST WOMAN
FREE
GIRL
GOV
HOUSEM
HOUSM
JEN
JENK
KEEP
LITTLE BOY
MAR
MARGERY
MR. FUDGE
MR. GRUB
MR. HASSOCK
MRS. B
MRS. BALT
MRS. BALTIMORE
MRS. F
MRS. FREE
MRS. FREEMAN
OLD WOMAN
PET
SAILOR
SECOND MOB
SECOND VOTE
SECOND WOMAN
SER
SERV
SIM
THIRD MOB
TRUE
TURN
VOTER

____________________________________________________________


Full text: THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY IN PROSE, WITH OCCASIONAL PASSAGES OF VERSE. IN THREE ACTS.
 
Front matter  PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Claudien, a Danish Nobleman.
Van Maurice, his Friend.
Baron Hartman, a near Relation of Van Maurice.
Kranzberg, a Citizen of Lubeck, related to Van Maurice and Hartman.
Ardusoffe, Advocate.
Borion, Advocate.
Corman, Confidential Servant to Kranzberg.
Judges, Confessors, Officers of Justice, Mariners, &c. &c.
WOMEN. Rosella, Sister to Van Maurice.
Margaret, her confidential and domestic Friend.
Scene, the free Imperial City of Lubeck, and at Sea.
 
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. —An Ante-chamber in the House of Van Maurice. Enter Baron Hartman and Margaret, by different sides. HARTMAN. Good morning, fair Margaret! I come to have the felicity of half an hour's conversation with Rosella. I hope this will prove to her, as well as myself, the most agreeable way of receiving an answer to the billet which I had the honour to send her this morning.
MARGARET. Indeed, honoured Sir, she is in no spirits to receive company at present, and wishes to be alone.
HARTMAN. Ha! she is considering of it then. It is indeed a serious consideration; but after the favour —I may indeed call it so—the condescension
 
at least with which she has received my devoted attentions, I might fairly have supposed that a short time would have sufficed for the ceremony of consideration.
MARGARET. I believe, Baron, that ceremony, as you are pleased to term it, has been gone through already. At least, I believe, this billet which she desired me to put into your own hands, along with this case of jewels, will convince you that further consideration were needless. I was just going to your house to deliver them to you.
HARTMAN. What does she mean? return my present!
MARGARET.    The letter will, no doubt, explain it.
HARTMAN snatches the letter, opens it with agitation, reading it half aloud and half to himself. “Only friendship to return for all.—Pleasure in your society as a neighbour and a kinsman.— Beg of you to accept my grateful acknowledgments.” What is all this? Would she prolong the fooling of attendance another half year? Let her beware how she sports with devoted affection like mine. Walks to and fro somewhat disturbed, then returns to Margaret.  I understand all this well enough. Let me find her in her own apartment.

 
MARGARET preventing him as he endeavours to pass on. Nay, Sir, you must not.
HARTMAN. Foolish girl! I know thy fair friend better than thou dost. Let me pass to her apartment, and I'll soon make her glowing lips contradict the cold words of her letter.
MARGARET. Indeed, Baron Hartman, you must not pass.
HARTMAN. Why so? Nonsensical mummery!
MARGARET. She wishes to be alone.
HARTMAN. Alone! wishes to be alone! that is not her usual inclination. What is the matter?
MARGARET. She is indisposed, and can see no one. And I must take the liberty to say that you are deluding yourself when you mistake that cheerful gaiety of her manner, which is natural to her,    for a proof of partiality to your company.
HARTMAN. If what you say be true, young mistress,—if this answer of hers be a serious one, I have not deluded myself, but she has deluded me.

 
MARGARET. Then every pleasant man of her acquaintance might say the same thing, for she is cheerful and affable with them all.
HARTMAN. No, madam; affable and cheerful as you please, but she has not demeaned herself towards them as she has done towards me: and I will know the cause why I am so treated, before another hour passes over my head.
                                         Going. MARGARET. But you will be pleased to take this with you, Baron. Offering him the case of jewels, which he casts from him indignantly.
HARTMAN. Let any jilt in Lubeck wear the paltry baubles for me.
                                         Exit. MARGARET alone. The vanity of that man is unconquerable; and yet I cannot help pitying him a little; for Rosella, to conceal her betrothment to Claudien, has amused herself with his folly too long. Picking up the case. I must keep these rich jewels carefully, however, and restore them to him at a more favourable moment.
                                         Exit.
 
SCENE II. The Apartment of Rosella. She is discovered sitting by a table writing, and Claudien standing behind her chair, overlooking her as she writes. CLAUDIEN.
That pretty hand, and those fair characters
So delicate! they should alone express
Words of a sweet and sisterly affection,—
Words of the dearer tenderness of love.
Have done with cold notes of formality;
Let Marg'ret henceforth write such things as those. Lifting her hand from the paper and caressing it.
No, this white hand, this soft, this delicate hand,
As delicate as if the early dew
Dropp'd from the lily's bell or hawthorn's blossom,
A fresh collection of all summer sweetness,
Had been its daily unguent, it is mine;
Thou'st given it to me; ay, and it shall write
To me, to me alone, when I am gone.
 
ROSELLA.
A wise precaution, mask'd with seeming love.
When I shall think of nobody but thee,
I might, perhaps, betray our secret bond,
Beginning thus to some old gouty kinsman
A dull epistle—“My dear Claudien.” CLAUDIEN.
Alas, that secret, that constraining secret!
It is a galling weight about our necks,
Would we were rid of it! ROSELLA.
But when the king of Denmark, thy good master,
Shall know how thou art circumstanced, he surely
Will not enforce upon thee an alliance
   Unsought by thee, now thought of with repugnance,
Because he did at first, on thy behalf,
Propose it to the parent of the maid,—
A maid thou'st scarcely seen, and never woo'd? CLAUDIEN.
I trust he will not, and should lose no time
In reaching Copenhagen ere the court
Remove to Elsineur, that speedily
I may return to thee, my sweet Rosella,
A free and happy man. ROSELLA.
A free man, say'st thou, Claudien?
 
CLAUDIEN.
Yes, gentle mistress, for the bonds of love
Are very freedom, or are something better.
Still, to protect thee from all harm, to be
Near to thee always; sit by thee unchidden—
Read to thee pleasant tales—look in thy face,
And, all thy smiles and meaning glances scanning,
To do what they desire—will this be thraldom?
Will this be servitude? ROSELLA.
Ah, no! that is not servitude from which,
When tired of it, thou wilt break loose, my friend. CLAUDIEN.
And so I will, my love, when thou art tiresome,
But when will that be; say? ROSELLA.
E'en when thou see'st what thou may'st shortly find,
A face to gaze on, fairer than Rosella's. CLAUDIEN.
Be not offended; such a one already
   I've seen, and yet the latchet of thy shoe
I'd rather tie and have one smile of thanks,
Than press a score of kisses on her lips. ROSELLA.
She may be also wittier than me.
 
CLAUDIEN.
And pardon me again; that may be possible;
Yet would I rather hear thy cheerful voice
Bidding me a good morrow, faith and truth!
Than all her wit and wisdom, were she learn'd
As Gottenburgh professor. ROSELLA.
Fy on thee, Claudien! Would'st thou then insinuate
That I am not thy reasonable choice,
But one that has been fasten'd on thy fancy
By spells of witchcraft? CLAUDIEN.
Thou hast it, love; by very spells of witchcraft;
For how could that be reasonable choice
Which no deliberation knew. Thy countenance,
Such as it is—thy joyous playful countenance,
I look'd upon, and look'd upon again,
Till I became a fascinated thing,
As helpless as an infant. ROSELLA.
Alas, poor child! this was a sudden change. CLAUDIEN.
Nay, I am wrong; it was not quite so sudden;
For after I had seen thy face, I waited—
Waited with eager ears to hear thy voice,
And then I watch'd thee to observe thy movements,
 

   Light step and graceful gesture—then I waited
To hear thy voice again, and then— ROSELLA.
                                         I pray thee
Have done with such a foolish list of thens!
Dost thou forget thou hast already won me?
I'll have thee presently, I do suppose,
Repeating all thy courtship o'er again,
And kneeling at my feet for perfect idleness. CLAUDIEN.
And so thou shalt, were't only for the pleasure
Of being raised again by that white hand.                                          Kneeling to her playfully. ROSELLA. laying her hand upon his head.
It will not raise thee up, thou saucy mimic!
But keep thee down, for this thy mock humility,
Which is but vanity in cloak and vizard;
The bearing of success without misgiving
Or fear of change; the full security
Of an affianced lord. Enter Baron Hartman behind. CLAUDIEN.
                                         To keep me down,
Whilst thy soft fingers, mixing with my hair,
Gives thrilling so delightful! on such terms,
I'd gladly at thy feet kneel by the hour,
So to be mortified—
 
HARTMAN. rushing forward.
                                         Oh, woman, woman!  Claudien starts up from the feet of his Mistress, and both seem surprised and embarrassed. ROSELLA. Baron Hartman here!
HARTMAN. Yes, madam; and, as I perceive, not altogether welcome.
ROSELLA.    In this place and at this hour, Baron!
HARTMAN. An injured man, madam, regards not time or place. As a near kinsman, had there been no other plea, I might have been admitted for one half hour into your presence, to know the cause why, after such long and well-received attentions, I am now to be discarded from your favour. But this, forsooth, could not be: you were indisposed; you were alone, and wished to be alone. I have, no doubt, grievously offended in breaking thus upon the privacy of one who loves so very much to be alone.
CLAUDIEN. Truly, Baron, I have, like yourself, come unbidden into this lady's presence, and have cast myself at her feet, as you have witnessed; for
 
which humiliation she has only rewarded me with mocking: had you done the same, Baron, you would, perhaps, have fared no better.
HARTMAN. Count Claudien, the freedom of a careless stranger may be some excuse for your intrusion here, but can be none for her excluding me on pretences so frivolous; for the alleged indisposition is, I perceive, only the being indisposed for my company, who am an old and faithful friend; ay, and her kinsman to boot.
CLAUDIEN.    My noble baron, you and I are rivals, and rest our pretensions here on very different foundations; you on being known to the lady, I on the reverse. But I am the wiser of the two.
HARTMAN. How so, I pray?
CLAUDIEN. Is it not a notorious fact, that strangers of any apparent likelihood always occupy the vantage ground in every woman's favour? Had the fair Rosella known me as long as she has known you, she might have discovered in me as many faults, perhaps, as would have excluded me from the very threshold of her vestibule.
ROSELLA. So you see, my dear cousin, that the wisest
 
thing you can do, is to leave the count and me time enough to discover how foolish we both are.
HARTMAN. The wisest thing I can do, madam, is to forget and despise the heartless caprice of a fickle, fantastical beauty.
ROSELLA. Be wise, then, good cousin, since you have found out the way.
HARTMAN. Heartless woman! canst thou treat with such levity the misery thou hast occasioned?
ROSELLA. O pardon me, my dear Hartman! thou takest this matter more deeply than I dreamt of. Think    not so severely of me; if I have erred, lend me of thine own generosity some further credit on thy good opinion, and I will redeem it. Have you not always known me as your gay and thoughtless cousin? and why will you tax me now as a grave and prudent dame? Come to me to-morrow; I shall then have seen my brother, and will talk to you seriously on a subject which to-day I would avoid.
HARTMAN. At what hour shall I meet you?

 
ROSELLA. Not at an early hour.—At noon.—No, not so soon.—In the afternoon—in the evening: that will suit me best.
HARTMAN. Well, since it must be deferred so long, let the evening be the time. But remember, madam, I will submit no longer to be the sport of female caprice. If this gay stranger takes such treatment more lightly, he is of a different temperament, perhaps, and it may agree with him; but it will not pass with Baron Hartman.
                                         Exit, proudly. CLAUDIEN. My dear Rosella! I fear thou hast been leading on this poor man in a fool's chase. I pity him.
ROSELLA. I fear I have, and do repent me of it.
CLAUDIEN. It was but the foible of thy gay and thoughtless    nature.
ROSELLA. Ah no! I fear I have not that excuse.
CLAUDIEN. Intentional deceit!

 
ROSELLA. Dearest Claudien! kill me not with that word and that look! It was to conceal my connection with thee, that I have of late received the gallantries of Hartman with more than usual graciousness; but it was to deceive the world rather than himself. Fool that I was!
CLAUDIEN. Yes, it was foolish.
ROSELLA. But though I might have guessed that his inordinate vanity would construe my behaviour into downright love of his fine form and mental endowments, I never imagined he would feel more pain in the disappointment than a little wounded vanity might inflict, nor am I sure that he really feels more deeply.
CLAUDIEN. I fear thou dost him wrong. I pity him from my heart; and were it possible for me to chide what is so dear, I should inflict upon thee, at this moment, words of grave rebuke.
ROSELLA. Nay, not now, dear Claudien! reserve them till thy return, for then I shall be so happy that they will sound in my ear like harmony. I cannot bear them now. Weeping.

 
CLAUDIEN.    Nay, nay, mistress of my soul! I meant not to distress thee so much. Those tears are a greater punishment to me than I can bear. And let me wipe them off,—kiss them off. Thou shalt never shed tears again for Claudien's sternness.
Enter Margaret. ROSELLA. What is the matter?
MARGARET. Nothing; I am only come to inform the Count that the master of the vessel is below, and wishes to know his will concerning the removal of his luggage.
CLAUDIEN. Ha! very true; I should have waited for him at home, and it slipt from my memory entirely. Keep thee from being in love, fair Margaret, it makes one's head not worth a maravedi.
MARGARET. But the heart finds what the head loses, and where is the waste?
CLAUDIEN. True, girl; and be pleasant and amusing to thy friend here, while I am absent.
                                         Exit.
 
ROSELLA. My dear Margaret, didst thou see Hartman when he left the house?
MARGARET. Only a glimpse of him.
ROSELLA. Did he look very miserable?
MARGARET. I do think he did, poor man; but he is so vain, he will be the better for his mortification.
ROSELLA. I thank thee, Margaret; it does me good to    hear thee say so; for I know that thy thoughts and thy words are the same.
MARGARET. Come along, my dear child, and I will tell thee a new story of his consummate conceit as we go: sha'n't we take our usual turn on the terrace?
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE III. A Public Garden. Enter Hartman, walking backward and forward in a perturbed manner, and presently enter Kranzberg, who stands observing him curiously before he speaks. KRANZBERG. Good morning, kinsman; nothing, I hope, has happened to disturb you: I have marked you at a distance, striding along with a quick unusual pace: pardon the solicitude of friendship, if I am anxious to know what discomposes you so much.
HARTMAN. Let it pass, let it pass! I know my place and my pretensions as well as any man; she shall neither break my heart nor discompose me long.
KRANZBERG. It is a woman, then, who is the cause of your agitation. What kind of woman can she be who is unfavourable to the suit of Baron Hartman?

 
HARTMAN. Thou may'st well ask that question, my friend; it would, I believe, cause some surprise in many a noble citizen of Lubeck.
KRANZBERG. In many a noble lady of Lubeck we may, at least, aver, though strange unnatural things will sometimes happen, as if by witchery. But let her have her way; she will be glad enough at last to bring you back to her toils again by humble submission, if you will have spirit enough to forswear her company for a time.
HARTMAN. A time!
KRANZBERG. Ay, some weeks or so.
HARTMAN.    Perhaps thou art right. I had good reason to believe my company was agreeable to her. But—but—
KRANZBERG. Out with it, Baron! you cannot question my friendship or secrecy, and perhaps I may be of use to you.
HARTMAN. This cousin of mine—

 
KRANZBERG. What, the fair Rosella; she is the culprit!— I had almost guessed as much.
HARTMAN. But thou canst not guess the excess of her fickleness.
KRANZBERG. I will not attempt it, for you shall tell me.
HARTMAN. She denied me access to her presence this very morning, on the pretence of being unwell, and wishing to be alone; and when I made my entry by stealth through the private door of her apartment, I found her engaged in playful coquetry with Claudien.
KRANZBERG. I fear there is something more than play concerned in this coquetry.
HARTMAN. But she has not regarded him of late; her smiles were bestowed upon me.
KRANZBERG. Deceitful smiles, to cover secret passion. Believe me, kinsman, she has only made you the cover for her wiles; and I am well assured, that    when he is returned from Copenhagen, where he goes to remove some obstacle to their wishes, they
 
will, with the approbation of her brother Van Maurice, throw aside all disguise, and be married. He sails in the Mermaid to-morrow.
HARTMAN. May the waves of the sea be his winding-sheet! May the fishes of the ocean devour his lothly carcass!
KRANZBERG. It may, indeed, be lothly enough when it falls to their share, but for his living carcass, at least, you must own that is noble and goodly.
HARTMAN. I own it not: to me there is something in his air, his form, his mien, in the glance of his eye, yea, in the garb which he wears, that is intolerable.
KRANZBERG. The ladies of Lubeck think differently.
HARTMAN. Let them think as they will! it makes me mad to hear of such stupid, such perverse, such blind partiality. Senseless, fickle fools!
KRANZBERG. True, they are fickle enough; but never mind it, that will cure the evil. They will praise him for an Apollo till he marry Rosella, and abuse him for a scarecrow afterwards.

 
HARTMAN. Marry Rosella! I will have the heart's blood from his body ere I endure this misery for one day longer.
KRANZBERG. Fy, fy, good Baron! I am very sorry I have    said so much to you on this subject; but the friendly,—I may truly say, affectionate regard I feel for you, besides the admiration I have long entertained for your merits, made me unable to conceal from you longer the unworthy deceit which has been practised upon you. When I saw her smile upon you, and glance secret looks of fondness to Claudien,—
HARTMAN. Say no more of it; my very ears are ringing with the sound. I will have vengeance ere another day pass over my head.
                                         Exit furiously. KRANZBERG alone. Let the fool work upon this! it will embroil him at least with Van Maurice and his sister, and I shall have the management of himself and his fortune in my own hands. In a calculating posture, after having taken a turn across the Stage, muttering to himself. Well, two thousand good acres, corn-land and forest, though encumbered with the due maintenance of the proprietor, may be as profitable to me as a third part of the fee-simple.
 
What idiots they are who put their throats in jeopardy of the hangman, to have the actual property of money, when without risk or trouble they may have the actual spending thereof!—O there is nothing one may not procure, when one is happy enough to have a rich    fool for one's friend—one's very dear, noble, feeling, high-minded friend! To soil one's hands with crime but for a little more than one can safely wheedle from him; it is the act of a hot-headed idiot!
                                         Exit. SCENE IV. A Library, with globes, cabinets, and other furniture, denoting the apartment of a student; a Table in front, on which burns a Lamp, the back of the Stage being entirely in shade. Enter Claudien by a concealed door at the bottom of the Stage, who walks once or twice across it in a distracted manner, and then leaning his back against the wall, continues motionless. Enter Van Maurice by the front, with a book in his hand, which he lays upon the table. VAN MAURICE after having turned over the leaves for some time. It is very strange; the passage opened to my
 
hand in this very book but the other day, and now it is nowhere to be found. A heavy sigh is uttered by Claudien.  I thought I heard something. Looking round. It is fancy. Turning over the leaves again. I will not give up the search; it was certainly here, and it will bear me out in every thing I have advanced on the subject. A deep sigh, uttered as before. There is somebody near me. Looking round the room more perfectly, and discovering Claudien.  Who art thou, lurking yonder in the shade? Come forward to the light, be thy designs hostile or friendly. Speak; say who thou art?
CLAUDIEN advancing.
Thy friend. VAN MAURICE.
My friend, here at this hour in such a plight!
What is the matter, Claudien? what has happened? CLAUDIEN.
Something has happen'd!—I will tell thee all
When I am able. VAN MAURICE.
Thou'rt deadly pale; thy face is strangely haggard.
Sit down, sit down; thou art too weak to stand.
 
CLAUDIEN sinking, half supported by Van Maurice, into a chair.
The light bewilders me. VAN MAURICE.
There's fever on thee; let me feel thy hand.
Ha! there is blood upon it; thou art wounded;
   Thou'rt faint and need'st assistance. Going. CLAUDIEN preventing him.
Call no one here, but stay with me thyself.
'Tis not my own blood, Maurice; would it were! VAN MAURICE.
Hast thou slain any one? CLAUDIEN.
He did attack me; from his hand I wrested
The clenched dagger—plunged it in his breast. VAN MAURICE.
Then God be praised thou hast escaped, dear Claudien! CLAUDIEN.
Oh say not so! I've taken human life,
I've sent a sinful soul to its dread reck'ning. VAN MAURICE.
Be not so overcome; there is no cause.
His death is thy deliv'rance; and the laws
Of God and man will fully justify
An act of self-defence.
 
CLAUDIEN.
But me they will not justify! Beneath me—
My knee upon his breast. Starting from his seat with a gesture of despair. —Oh! what availed
The poor offence of a few spiteful words,
That I should do a fell—a ruffian's deed! VAN MAURICE.
Be patient, Claudien, nor against thyself
Speak with such vehemence of condemnation.
Hadst thou resisted provocation, surely
It had been well. Thou'st done a fearful deed,
But 't was a reckless, instantaneous impulse. CLAUDIEN.
No, no! Oh, no! there was a fearful moment,
And thoughts cross'd o'er my mind before I struck him.
Would it had been an instantaneous impulse! VAN MAURICE.
   Distress of mind obscures thine understanding. CLAUDIEN.
I've loved and been beloved by worthy men;
A noble, gen'rous heart dwelt in my breast,
As they believed, and so, alas, did I.
But Providence has brought it to the proof;
It was a fiend's heart; not a noble one.
Maurice, Van Maurice, when upon thy shoulder
 

I leant this morning, list'ning to the praise
Which thy too partial friendship lavish'd on me,
That I deserved it not, full well I knew,
But little did I think a deed like this—                                          Bursting into tears. VAN MAURICE.
My dear, dear Claudien! I will love thee still,
Will praise thee still; thou art a noble creature. CLAUDIEN.
Call me not so! it is excruciating.
I was a happy man, he was unhappy;
I at the moment arm'd, he weaponless;
I was the victor, he upon the ground.
I might have saved his life, and meant to save it;
But keen suggestions rush'd, I know not how,
Like blasts from hell, all nature's virtue searing;
Like poison'd arrows from an ambush'd foe;
Like gleams, revealing for one fearful instant
The weltering billows of a midnight deep,—
Athwart my mind they rush'd; and what came after!
O God! thy boundless mercy may forgive,
   But I for ever am a wretched man! VAN MAURICE.
But tell thy story more connectedly;
Whom hast thou slain?—Hush, hush! there's people coming.
I hear strange voices and the sound of feet.                                          Runs to the door, and locks it.
 

Haste to the garden-gate,—go to thy lodgings,
Thou wert at any rate to sail to-morrow
For Copenhagen by the early tide;
Thy quitting Lubeck will not raise suspicion.
Take leave, then, of Rosella, at the hour
When she expects thee, as if nought gave pain
But leaving her. Go home, all will go well.                                          Knocking at the door.
Dost thou not hear? art spell-bound to the spot?
Go home immediately.                                          Leads him hastily to the private door, and pushes him gently away.                                          Exit Claudien.                                          The knocking repeated still louder without: Van Maurice returns to the opposite side and unlocks the door. Enter Kranzberg and two Officers of Justice. KRANZBERG. How intent you have been on your studies, good Baron! to let us knock so long at your door!
VAN MAURICE. I expected no visiters at this hour.
KRANZBERG. Visiters will come at all hours when matters of moment compel them. I have that to tell you of which it concerns you much to know.—
 
But you look as if you knew it already, for your face is as white as your neckcloth.
VAN MAURICE. I know not what you mean; but I expect to hear something very dreadful from the alarm of your manner. What concern have I in your    tale? which you had better tell me quickly in as few words as may be. What has happened?
KRANZBERG. Your cousin, Baron Hartman, is murdered; the body has been found in a field, under the northern rampart.
VAN MAURICE. Are you sure he is dead? The dagger, perhaps, has not gone so deep as you imagine; and he may but have fainted from loss of blood.
FIRST OFFICER stepping eagerly up to Van Maurice . And how do you know, Sir, that it is a dagger which has given the wound?
VAN MAURICE in confusion. I guess—I suppose—it is the common weapon of an assassin.
SECOND OFFICER aside to Kranzberg . Did you mark that? I have my suspicions.

 
KRANZBERG after a pause, during which they all look on Van Maurice and on one another significantly. But you give us no orders, Van Maurice? You are his nearest kinsman: it belongs to you to act on this unhappy occasion.
                                         Whilst they are speaking, First Officer goes round the room, looking into every corner, and at last stoops and lifts something from the floor, at the bottom of the Stage. VAN MAURICE. Yes, true; something should be done. Let the body be removed to his house, and try if it can possibly be recovered.
KRANZBERG. That has been done already, and it is as dead as the corpse of your grandfather. Are these all the orders you have to give? Sha'n't we send an armed party through the country to track out the murderer?
FIRST OFFICER advancing. We need not track him far. Holding up the dagger.    Here is his mark: and, Baron Van Maurice, I arrest thee in the name of the state. Laying hold of him.
VAN MAURICE repelling him. Lay no hands on me, or ye may dearly answer for such an outrage. I am most innocent of the
 
crime with which you would charge me; though I may well look disturbed on hearing such terrible intelligence.
KRANZBERG. Ay, so thou may'st; but there is more than looks to condemn thee. Showing him the dagger, upon which he recoils some paces back, and seems confounded. Does this appal thee? We arrest thee in the name of the state, and this shall be our witness that we have not acted rashly.
                                         They all endeavour to seize him, while he struggles with them; and then enter several Servants. FIRST SERVANT. Lay hands on our master! Ye shall take our lives, hell-hounds, ere ye wrong one hair of his head.
FIRST OFFICER. We arrest him in the name of the state, and he is our lawful prisoner.
FIRST SERVANT showing a pistol. And I will blow your brains out in my own name, if ye do not let him go i' the instant.
                                         More armed Servants rushing in, surround Kranzberg and the Officers, and rescue Van Maurice. 
 
VAN MAURICE recovering his composure. Ye see I am freed from your grasp, and ye are now prisoners in this house during my pleasure.
All the Servants, speaking at once. Yes, noble Baron; give them to our charge, and we will keep them securely, I warrant you.
VAN MAURICE to the Servants. I thank you, my friends; but I have somewhat    more to say to these gentlemen. Ye see that I might detain you here, as long as my own convenience or safety, granting I were guilty, might require it; but I release you freely, upon this condition, that I shall remain at liberty, unmolested, till to-morrow mid-day; after that hour, I bind myself, as a man of honour, to be found here in my own house, ready without resistance to obey the laws of my country.
FIRST OFFICER. Spoken like a man of honour, and we will trust you.
VAN MAURICE to Kranzberg . And you promise this? To Second Officer. And you.
KRANZBERG and SECOND OFFICER both at once. We do.
VAN MAURICE to Servants. Let these gentlemen retire freely when it is
 
their pleasure. To Kranzberg.  Kinsman, good night.
                                         Exit.  Kranzberg and Officers remain on the front, whilst the Servants retire to the bottom of the Stage. FIRST OFFICER to Kranzberg . Had we not better go hence and return by and by with a guard to hover, concealed round the house, and watch his motions? He may make his escape else, for all his fair promises.
KRANZBERG. Let him do so; if he fly the country he is outlawed, and that will serve the purpose as effectually.
FIRST OFFICER. Purpose! is there any other purpose but the    vindication of the law, which says, “He who sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed.”
                                          Kranzberg turns away in confusion, and pretends to speak to the Servants at the bottom of the Stage. SECOND OFFICER. What! man, dost thou not understand him?
FIRST OFFICER. No, faith! and thy wit is sharper than I reckon for if thou dost.

 
SECOND OFFICER. Yet the mystery is not very deep neither. The Baron here is heir to Baron Hartman, and Kranzberg again is next heir after him, the lands being strictly so destined; and an outlaw, thou knowest, is a dead man as to all inheritance.
FIRST OFFICER. Why, there's some sense in that. And by my faith! if Van Maurice has murdered Hartman to transfer his large estate to Kranzberg, he has sold himself to the devil for a ducat.
SECOND OFFICER. Yes; hell will have a good bargain of it every way, for the revenues of the land will be as much spent for its interest in the possession of Kranzberg, as if given in fee simple to Beelzebub.
FIRST OFFICER. Nay, nay; he lives in good repute,—thou art uncharitable.
KRANZBERG advancing to the front. Come, friends; let us return to our homes; to-morrow, at mid-day, we meet here again.
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE V. The Apartment of Rosella; she enters, followed by an old Seaman, speaking as she enters. ROSELLA. And the wind is fair, thou sayest, but the sky foretelling change. Thou art an old mariner, good Jacome, and hast skill in sky and weather; tell me, then, faithfully, does it forbode a storm?
JACOME. No, madam; not to say a storm; nothing to make you or any of the friends of Count Claudien uneasy: a stiff gale or so; and that, with a tight new vessel to trust to, is but a passing rouse for sailors or passengers either. It only makes a stir on board and the blood circulate more quickly. No, no, no! nothing to make one uneasy.
ROSELLA. God grant it may be so!
JACOME. Fear not, madam, fear not! You know I never speak but as I think; and I would not disgrace my former calling now by lying like a landsman.

 
ROSELLA. I hear them coming; do what I desired thee, quickly.
                                         Exit Jacome.
Thank heaven! the voyage is but short; the time
Of his return fix'd as the calendar,
If that the fickle winds will give permission. Enter Claudien and Van Maurice.
True to the hour of taking leave, my Claudien:
Ah! be as punctual to the promised time
Of thy return. And wilt thou not? CLAUDIEN.
                                         At least,
   The fault shall not be mine, if I am not. ROSELLA.
How gravely and how solemnly thou sayest so!
Has aught befallen to make thee on this point
Less sure than thou wert yesterday?—Dear brother,
You spoke so lightly of our parting then,
But now your cheer is wonderfully changed. VAN MAURICE.
Something indeed has happen'd, dear Rosella,
That may defer thy Claudien's return
For a short month or so.
 
ROSELLA after looking at them inquiringly.
                                         No, no, Van Maurice,
Upon your faces I do plainly read
A more distressing tale. Deceive me not:
Tell me the worst at once; I'm his betroth'd,
And have a right to know it. Have I not?
Have I not, gentle Claudien? CLAUDIEN.
Thou hast a right to every thing, my love,
That a devoted heart can give. My life,
All that deserves the name of life, I have
But in thy presence; to be absent from thee
Longer than strict necessity compels
Would be a wanton act of self-destruction.
Trust, then, that he who is so strongly bound
Will soon return. The carrier-bird, released,
Points to one cherish'd spot her arrowy flight;
Not air's bright insects, nor earth's alpine peaks,
   With purple berries clothed, her wonted lures,
From its true line can warp it e'en so much
As the vibration of a stricken cord. ROSELLA.
This is no answer: art thou not my own,—
Almost my husband, and here stands a brother,
And yet you deal with me in mysteries.
Fie! is this well? Have I deserved this wrong? VAN MAURICE.
Be satisfied, Rosella; urge us not.
 

It is not want of confidence in thee
Which makes us so reserved; urge no further. ROSELLA.
Nay, but I will; for ye conceal from me
Some recent and disastrous event
To spare me pain. But ye mistake your aim.
Incertainty is aggravated pain.
Is he a ruin'd man? then I am ready
With heart and hand to sooth his poverty.
Is he proscribed by law? then I am ready
My country to abandon for his sake.
Say any thing, and I will bear it firmly
And meekly as I may. CLAUDIEN.
My dearest love, I thought to have parted from thee
With brighter omens of a glad return:
But now thou weep'st because the very day
Of my return is doubtful. If I stay
Two weeks or three weeks longer than we reckoned,
   Shall I not still be welcome? ROSELLA.
O, mock me not with weeks! thou knowest well
No time can make thee otherwise than welcome;
To me most dearly welcome.
Keep thy mysterious secret, if thou must;
But make amends by swearing on this hand
 

Not to extend thine absence for a day
Beyond the added time which thou hast mentioned. CLAUDIEN.
Upon this hand, so lovely and so dear,
Not to be absent for a day—an hour
Longer than sad necessity compels me.
But thou meanwhile wilt keep me in thy thoughts.
Write to me often; wilt thou not, Rosella?
And be to me, in whate'er clime or country
A wayward fate may doom me to reside,
The very gleam and warmth of my existence. ROSELLA.
A wayward fate may doom thee to reside!
What words are these? Thou never wilt return!                                          Wringing her hands in anguish. VAN MAURICE aside to Claudien .
Begone, begone! thy weakness will betray us.
Sister; thou givest way to apprehension,
Like a poor perverse wife who has been spoil'd
With long indulgence. 'T is a paltry proof
Of thy affection in an hour like this,
To add to his distress. Fie! be more generous! ROSELLA.
And art thou angry with me, gentle Maurice?
   Thou art not wont to chide. O, woe is me!
 

There must be something wrong—far wrong, indeed,
When he is sorrowful and thou unkind. VAN MAURICE.
Pardon me, sister, something has distressed me;
I meant not to have told thee till to-morrow.
Our cousin Hartman died last night. ROSELLA.
                                         So suddenly!
Awfully sudden! I am sorry for it;
Yes; very, very sorry. Ah, poor Hartman!
I have, with too much levity, I fear,
Made his last days pass most uneasily.
He was vindictive, vain, and irritable:
But when the storm of passion passed away,
Who was more ready to repair a wrong
With generous amends? Alas! poor Hartman!
And thou too, gentle Claudien, weep'st for him,
Although he loved thee not. Well may'st thou weep;
For thou wert also one of his tormentors:
Ay, we did both of us too hardly press
Upon his natural infirmity. CLAUDIEN.
Detested wretch! I've been a fiend, a— VAN MAURICE laying hold of him, and pressing his mouth.
                                         Claudien,
 

Art thou a madman?—Come, the wind is fair,
The vessel is already weighing anchor.
Bid to your mistress, then, a short adieu,
   As cheerly as you may. They embrace and separate.
Yes; bravely done, Rosella!—bravely done!
Thou art the firmest now. ROSELLA stepping after Claudien .
Take this, and this, and wear them for my sake. Enter Margaret. MARGARET. There is a ship-boy below with notice that the Mermaid is just leaving port.
VAN MAURICE to Claudien .
Come then, my friend; we may no longer tarry. ROSELLA.
Go, Claudien: I will hie me to the roof
Of my pavilion; there I'll watch thy ship,
Till, like a sea-bird, on the distant waves
It fades away to nothing. Two hours still
It will be visible. Cast up thy mantle;
Make me, I pray, some signal from the deck.
Farewell, heaven prosper thee! farewell, farewell!                                          Exeunt Claudien and Van Maurice, but the latter returns hastily, and whispers to Margaret. 
 
ROSELLA. What did he whisper to thee, Margaret? I am frightened at every thing.
MARGARET. Nothing of importance: it was only to tell me that some necessary business might detain him from home the whole day; and, if so, you must not be uneasy.
ROSELLA. Uneasy! I may be as I will now: it matters not how I am till Claudien return again.
                                         Exeunt.
 
ACT II. SCENE I. —The Deck of a Ship, with a stormy Sea seen dimly beyond it. Sailors and Passengers are discovered, some on their knees, some clinging to the shrouds, some staggering about with wild gestures of despair, whilst some are endeavouring to work the ship, and disputing about what should be done; and a great confusion of voices is heard through the noise of the storm. The whole light should proceed from one part of the deck; viz. the binnacle, by which means want of expression of countenance in the under-actors will not be discovered, as none need come within the gleam of its light but those who can give expression. Claudien is discovered busy in assisting those who are endeavouring to save the vessel, near the bottom of the Stage. CAPTAIN on the front. I say it must be done; she cannot else be saved. Boatswain, thy refractory spirit is more dangerous than the tempest. A great confusion of sounds and voices. All hands to work i' the instant! Cut down the mast; lighten her of every thing, bales, casks, and chests,—cast all to the deep!

 
BOATSWAIN. By our Lady, it were downright cowardice to spoil ourselves of every thing for such a risk as this!
CAPTAIN. Thou know'st nothing of the matter.
BOATSWAIN. I have been in worse peril before, when both mast and freightage have been saved.
CAPTAIN. Be silent, madman! I am to judge of the peril, not thou. We are driving on the rocks of that very coast from which we departed: yonder gleams the lighthouse on the cliff.
MANY VOICES at once. Lord have mercy on us! heaven have mercy on us!
CAPTAIN. Silence, and hear my commands. All hands to work! life and death hang on your present exertions.
                                         Great noise and confusion, and they begin to cut down the mast and cast things overboard. FIRST SAILOR with a loud voice. It is all in vain! lighten her as you will, it can avail nothing as long as there is a murderer    on board.

 
CAPTAIN catching hold of him. What mean'st thou? On which of my passengers or crew dost thou fix such a horrible charge?
FIRST SAILOR pointing to Claudien . To that man yonder, your noble Danish passenger. If the devil have him not presently under the waves, neither ship nor one soul of all her living freight will be afloat one hour longer.
CAPTAIN. Thou speak'st in distraction.
FIRST SAILOR. I know that sound in the blast: no natural tempest ever bellows so.
MANY VOICES as before. Heaven have mercy upon us! it is a fearful sound!
FIRST SAILOR. There be fiends on the clouds and on the waves; they are roaring for their prey, and in God's name cast it to them instantly.
CAPTAIN. Thou art beside thyself! how knowest thou he is a murderer?
FIRST SAILOR. I heard him utter exclamations when he thought there was no one near him. Question
 
him thyself; if he will swear himself innocent of blood, send me to the bottom in his stead.
CAPTAIN beckoning Claudien to the front. Sir passenger, come hither. This man pointing to First Sailor  has heard thee utter such words as compels him to accuse thee of murder.    We may all be summoned few moments hence into the presence of our Great Judge, who cannot be deceived: if thou art guilty, cry to God for mercy and confess it; a ship in peril may not be laden with such an unblessed freight. Art thou innocent of blood?
CLAUDIEN. I am innocent of deliberate murder, but not of blood.
FIRST SAILOR. He confesses.
MANY VOICES. He confesses! he confesses! away with him!
OTHER VOICES. Cast him overboard, or we shall be all dead men presently.
CLAUDIEN. Hear me first, before ye be so rash.
VOICES again. No, no, no! we cannot sacrifice our own lives for thine: cast him overboard.

 
FIRST SAILOR. Bind him hand and foot, and cast him to the fiends that are roaring for him.
                                         They surround Claudien to bind him, when he draws his sword. CLAUDIEN. I will cut down the first man who dares to lay hands on me. Bind a fellow-creature and cast him to the waves! ye are worse than the fiends ye are afraid of: and if they be roaring for me, as ye apprehend, doubt not but they will have me, whether I am bound or free.
CAPTAIN. He says well: cast him overboard unbound, that he may save himself if possible.
                                         They again close round him to seize him, and he still keeps them off with his sword. CLAUDIEN.    Lay hands upon me at your peril! You need not be so fierce; for I will myself commit this body to the sea, that will, perhaps, be more merciful than you.
                                         He retires to the farther side of the deck, with his face to the crew and his back to the sea; then holding up his hand, as if uttering a short prayer, turns quickly round, and jumps overboard, the whole crew raising a wild cry, and remaining for a few moments after it in deep silence; the sound of the storm only heard.
 
CAPTAIN. He is a brave man, let him be what he may. God have mercy on us, and send us safe on our voyage! We have paid for it a fearful price! Calling to some who are looking over the side of the vessel. Can you see aught? Does he sink or swim?
BOATSWAIN. I saw his dark head once above the waves.
SECOND SAILOR. I saw it too.
THIRD SAILOR. So did I. God help him, and us too!
SECOND SAILOR. Look, look, yonder, I see it again! but a huge billow breaks over it: we shall see it no more.
THIRD SAILOR. He is too deep now under water, to rise a living man.
                                         The sound of the storm as before, very loud. CAPTAIN. The tempest is as violent as ever! we must lighten the ship after all.
                                         A great clamour and commotion among the crew, and the scene closes.
 
SCENE II. A Lawyer's Study, lumbered with tables, books, and papers, &c. Enter Borion, with a scroll in his hand, which he examines attentively. He then pauses, and considers before he speaks to himself. BORION. Proofs like these should condemn any man; why should I recoil from the task? Paces up and down, and then stopping short. Would this business were put into other hands! My client is candid and specious, as far as speech is concerned, but that sinister eye, the play of those muscles by the mouth, the widening of the nostrils at every virtuous sentiment he utters:— physiognomy is the whimsy of simpletons, if there be any truth or sincerity in that man. But here he comes.
Enter Kranzberg. KRANZBERG. Well, learned Sir, having had full time for consideration, what think you of it now? A pause. You see, I found my prosecution on no slight or fanciful proofs. Thus it stands: next
 
heir to the deceased; his confusion when we told him of the murder; that unwary expression which fell from him, showing that he knew with what weapon the wound was inflicted; and, above all, the dagger found in his apartment,— every thing combines to fix the foul deed upon him. There is no judge in the land who will hesitate to give sentence in my favour.
BORION. In your favour, Sir! is it favour to you that    your near relation should be publicly executed as a murderer? I thought you had prosecuted unwillingly, as next nearest of kin to the deceased, and therefore compelled to it.
KRANZBERG. True—very true, learned Borion; in my favour as a prosecutor, who, from duty, would make good his accusation. But as a man and a kinsman, with the affections of both, which heaven knows how deeply I feel! most keenly and severely against me. You perceive the distinction here?
BORION. It had escaped me.
KRANZBERG. I am drawn two different ways by two powerful ties; but my duty to the public must be preferred.
 
O, dear Sir! you little know the painful conflict in this bosom.
BORION. I can guess at it, Sir. But does Van Maurice, since his imprisonment, still continue to assert his innocence?
KRANZBERG. Of course he does. Is any man's assertion or oath regarded in a matter of this nature?
BORION. Yes, Sir; there are some men, whose simple word will go far in a matter of any nature, and Van Maurice is one of those.
KRANZBERG. Ah, my good Sir; there is a prepossession in    your mind, but let my wretched kinsman have the benefit of it; I wish not to remove it. Indeed I knew of this prepossession beforehand; and that I applied to you for the conduct of this prosecution, notwithstanding, shows how little I am disposed to deal hardly with the prisoner.— But here come the men whom you may question.
Enter a Servant, showing in the two Officers of Justice. BORION waving his hand. Let them pass into the further apartment.
                                         Exeunt Officers.
 
KRANZBERG. You are cautious, I see, and would question them apart from me. But you are right; I am nowise offended; on the contrary, even your distrust of myself gives me confidence in your integrity. Exit Borion, following the Officers, while Kranzberg looks angrily after him. The devil take his incredulous nature! who would demur on such flagrant proof as this? If it were not that the trial comes on to-morrow, and I dare not delay it, lest he should, after all, be innocent, I would put it into other hands that would undertake it more heartily. After consideration. No, no! I must press him to retain it. Were it known that he had given it up, that would create a strong prejudice against me. I must press him to retain it.
                                         Exit. SCENE III. A Prison: Van Maurice is discovered at the bottom of the Stage in a thoughtful disconsolate posture; he then comes forward and remains a short time, muttering to himself, before he speaks aloud. VAN MAURICE.
And infamy and death must be my portion
For my adherence to the manly ties
 

Of honour and of friendship!—No alternative!
Betray his confidence to save my life!
Do what is base to save me from disgrace!
Surely, some fiend of darkness must be dealing
With my necessity, when thoughts like these
Contaminate my mind.
He came to me in misery; in secret
His soul pour'd out its bitterness before me.
Away, away! ye base and mean suggestions!
God will deliver me.—Or should his will
Appoint my life to be the sacrifice,
The mem'ry of the just shall be at length
Redeemed from all dishonour. Noise at the door. Enter Gaoler.
Who's there? let no one enter but my sister
Or the good priest; have I not told thee so? Enter Ardusoffe. ARDUSOFFE. And may not your faithful counsellor also be admitted?
VAN MAURICE. Ay, true; I forgot thee, good Ardusoffe.— Well, what hast thou done for me? Hast thou discovered any thing that may tend to my exculpation? —Alas! thou shakest thy head: thou hast not been successful.
ARDUSOFFE.    Not, I fear, in any material degree. Your
 
servants unanimously declare their belief that you did not quit your apartments for the whole of that evening on which the fatal deed was committed: but as you were entirely shut up from the hour of twilight to almost midnight, the grounds of their belief are not satisfactory; your apartments, unhappily, having a private door leading to the garden, and from thence into the street.
VAN MAURICE. True; their belief only, under such circumstances, is but weak evidence.
ARDUSOFFE. It was your custom, they say, to ring your bell for some slight refreshment between nine and ten o'clock, but on that night, most unfortunately, you omitted it.
VAN MAURICE. My studies occupied me so entirely, that I forgot it.
ARDUSOFFE. I do most perfectly believe you: but who, sitting in judgment on attested facts, and compelled to pronounce sentence accordingly, will regard such asseveration? In short, my dear client, I am obliged to forewarn you, that if you still persist in refusing to account for the dagger being found in your chamber, and your previous
 
   knowledge that the deceased was slain by a wound from such a weapon, I see not how your judges can acquit you.
VAN MAURICE. Be it so! I am innocent: Heaven will protect me.
ARDUSOFFE. God grant you deliverance! But the ways of Divine Providence are mysterious as to this world. In the next, most assuredly, the innocent are always delivered.
VAN MAURICE. Have you, then, in the course of your legal experience, known instances of the innocent suffering death for imputed crimes?
ARDUSOFFE. I have; even when tried by an impartial judge, and the fair laws of their country.
VAN MAURICE. But their memory was vindicated afterwards, else you had never been acquainted with such dismal perversion of circumstances.
ARDUSOFFE. After many years,—nearly the lapse of half a century, it was discovered.

 
VAN MAURICE shuddering. Awful dispensation? Almost all his contemporaries —those whom he had loved and regarded, would go down to their graves, believing him guilty and depraved.
                                         Turns away from him much distressed. ARDUSOFFE. Let me conjure you, then, to do justice to yourself! It is a fearful thing to be cut off in    the prime of your days,—to die by the hands of an executioner,—to finish your course in disgrace.
VAN MAURICE. It is a fearful thing!—You tempt my mortal weakness almost beyond resistance.
ARDUSOFFE. Let nature have its way! O, consider of it! Run not on self-destruction.
VAN MAURICE supporting himself on the shoulder of Ardusoffe . Forbear a few moments, good Ardusoffe; I am considering of it.
ARDUSOFFE after a pause. The dew-drops stand upon thy forehead, and
 
thy whole frame is moved: decide as nature bids thee, and let this conflict cease.                                          A pause, in which Van Maurice, sinking from the shoulder of Ardusoffe, covers his face with both his hands. O have mercy on thyself, and let this conflict cease!
VAN MAURICE raising himself suddenly, with vehemence of gesture and voice.
It hath ceased, Ardusoffe, I'm now a man:
I will die honour'd in my inward mind,
And in the sight of heaven. Betide what will,
I'll not betray my trust! ARDUSOFFE.
Alas, alas! may Heaven have pity on thee,
Since thou repell'st all pity for thyself! Enter Rosella. ROSELLA.
I left thee, dearest Maurice, cheer'd and tranquil,
Like one possessing hope; what is the matter? ARDUSOFFE. Dear lady, circumstances bear hard against your brother; and, from some point of honour which I am not permitted to know, he refrains from exculpating himself. Join your entreaties
 
   with mine; you who are so deeply concerned in his safety and justification. Death and disgrace must not be incurred from romantic adherence to honour.
VAN MAURICE. If I could gain a respite for some weeks!
ARDUSOFFE. You may apply for it, and I will urge your suit; but it will be refused. Kranzberg, for his own sordid interest, pushes on the trial; and he is in high credit and favour with the judges.
ROSELLA.
O for my sake, if not thine own, my brother,
For my sake be entreated! In thy ruin
I shall be ruin'd, agonised, and crush'd;
Think not I could survive it! VAN MAURICE.
Leave me, Oh leave me; I am only fit
With mine own thoughts to commune. Your entreaties
Do but the more distract me.                                          Aside to Ardusoffe. 
Return to me again, but leave me now.                                          Exit Ardusoffe. ROSELLA.
Alas! and wilt thou not relent, dear Maurice?                                          A pause.
 

Why dost thou shake thy head, and look on me
So ruefully? there is a meaning in it. VAN MAURICE.
God save thee, my poor sister! ROSELLA.
Yes, God will save me, saving thee my brother,
Not else; for if thou die a felon's death,
I never can survive it.—For my sake
And for the sake of him, thine absent friend,
   Our gentle Claudien: would that he were here
To join with mine his earnest, strong entreaties! VAN MAURICE putting his hand upon her lips in an alarmed manner, and speaking low.
Hush! utter not his name; 'tis good for thee
That he is absent. ROSELLA.
Why that emotion at his name? Speak, speak!
Is he concern'd in this? VAN MAURICE.
Inquire no further, seek no further misery:
Thou hast enough already. ROSELLA.
A dreadful light breaks in upon me now;
Is Claudien concern'd? looks earnestly in his face. He is, he is!                                          Faints in the arms of her brother.
 
VAN MAURICE.
It is a death-blow to her stricken heart.
How fix'd and pale that lovely countenance,
More like my mother's than I ever saw it.
Like her who loved us both and rear'd us tenderly,
Who daily shed her widow's blessing o'er us,
And little thought for what calamities
We both might be reserved.
But she revives. How art thou, sweet Rosella? ROSELLA.
I've been asleep, and thought some fearful thing
Was girding me.—O no! it was not sleep:
I know it now distinctly. VAN MAURICE.
                                         Thou tremblest violently. ROSELLA.
I tremble, but thou need'st not be afraid;
I shall not faint again. VAN MAURICE.
                                         Fear not for Claudien. ROSELLA.
   My own dear brother; gen'rous and devoted;
Is any thing more precious than thyself?
No, right is right; thou shalt not die for Claudien.
Thank God he's absent! let him so remain:
 

I'll to the judges; I'll declare the truth;
I'll vindicate thy innocence, my Maurice. VAN MAURICE embracing her.
I thank thee, kind Rosella; but thy plea
Were altogether fruitless.—
Who would give credit to thy testimony?
For they will deem, to save a brother's life,
Thou dost accuse an absent man. Beside,
Who will corroborate what thou aver'st?
And what could'st thou aver? I've told thee nothing,
And, so God strengthen me! I never will. ROSELLA.
I'll to the judges; cast me at their feet,
And beg respite till I can write to Claudien. VAN MAURICE.
And would'st thou have him to return to Lubeck
That he may put himself into my place? ROSELLA distractedly.
I know not what I would or what I wish;
But thou, my noble Maurice, shalt not die. VAN MAURICE. Here comes the good confessor: leave me, sister.
Enter the Confessor, shown in by the Turnkey. You're welcome, reverend Father. To the Turnkey. Does any attendant on this lady wait without?

 
TURNKEY. Yes, Baron; a lady waits for her, who accompanied    her to the gate.
VAN MAURICE. Desire her to enter; I would speak with her. Exit Turnkey. Good Father, comfort this afflicted daughter.
                                         Speaking aside to Rosella, as he leads her to the Friar.
Let nothing pass your lips that hath a reference
To what we spoke of: take good heed; be secret. Sooth her, good Father; thou hast words of consolation for every earthly affliction.
Enter Margaret. I thank thee, friendly Margaret, for thy kind attendance on my poor distressed sister. Come near to me. Draws her to the front of the Stage, whilst the Confessor speaks in dumb show to Rosella behind. Rosella is not well; there is fever upon her spirits, and her mind wanders wildly. Be not alarmed at this, but give her an opiate,—a very powerful opiate: she has need of rest, and nature has no sleep for one so distracted with anxiety.
MARGARET. I will do so: she has been forwatched and
 
greatly distressed. And I pray heaven, dear Baron, that you may also have rest!
VAN MAURICE. I thank thee, Margaret. But do not tarry here! lead her away immediately. I do not wish to see her till the trial is over. Returning to Rosella.  Farewell, dear sister! I must now give my thoughts to things which regard    not this world. Exeunt Rosella and Margaret.  We will, if you please, good Father, retire to the inner cell.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE IV. The House of Kranzberg. Enter Kranzberg, followed by Corman, bearing a salver with wine, &c. which he sets upon a table. KRANZBERG speaking as they enter. Thou art right, Corman; a cup of this old Rhenish will do me good. I have been the whole day in a state of presentation; the eyes of many have been upon me; my cumbersome suit of decorum sits heavily upon me now; I must drop it for awhile and unbrace myself.

 
CORMAN pouring out wine and presenting it. Here, Sir; this will refresh you in the mean time, and your repast will be ready presently.
KRANZBERG after drinking. Ha, ha, ha! what a mountebank world we live in, full of inconsistencies: every body eagerly running after some wild delusion or other! To think, now, that a sober philosopher like Van Maurice should start up from his books, his globes, and compass, to put a foolish kinsman out of the world, and all for the enriching of Simon Kranzberg, whom he likes as much as thou dost a bit of musty stock-fish. By my faith, it is some waggish devil that hath tempted him to this imbecility of wickedness.
CORMAN. Yes, master; and the devil will take care of your interest for his own advantage.
KRANZBERG. But I'll cheat him, too, in the long run.
CORMAN. It must be some clever device, indeed, that cheats him.
KRANZBERG.    I'll give donations to the church; or I'll endow a chapel, and appoint a priest to pray my soul out of purgatory.

 
CORMAN. Ah, Sir! that will be a hard work for a simple priest of your appointment; it would be work enough for an archbishop. But it will help at least to put you into credit with the world.
KRANZBERG. Put me into cred it with the world! Am I not in very good credit with the world?—Why dost thou shake thy head so? Am I not? I have broken no laws: I have disregarded no rules of decency. I have preserved a show of kindness to all men; ay, and have felt real kindness for some. What does the world know against me, that thou shouldst look so significantly?
CORMAN. I don't say that they know any thing against you; but there is something in human nature called suspicion, that will sometimes contravene most provokingly all the good seeming that a painstaking man can put on.
KRANZBERG. And what do they suspect? What cause have I given for suspicion?
CORMAN. Why, my dear Sir, that story of the heiress stands somewhat between you and their good opinion.

 
KRANZBERG.    They stumble at a small impediment, methinks. Was it my fault that her needy uncle ran off with her fortune? Would they have had me marry a beggar, because I had inadvertently made suit to her?
CORMAN. Nay, heaven forbid! that were too romantic for a sane burgher of Lubeck; but they are not yet become liberal enough to tolerate inadvertent oaths.
KRANZBERG. Out on thee! Hadst thou managed that business for me with three grains of common sense, the transaction would never have been known.
CORMAN. Ah, my dear master! but you forget that my three grains of common sense were coupled with your three grains of cunning, and they did not prove prosperous yoke-fellows.
KRANZBERG. Go to! it is a fair character that has but one blot upon it.
CORMAN. True, if there were but one.
KRANZBERG. Lay they any thing else to my charge?

 
CORMAN. That matter of the poor widow's leasehold, which you deprived her of so cleverly, was not exactly to their mind.
KRANZBERG. Devil take them! and they boggle at that too! Had I not law on my side?
CORMAN.    I fear you had only decision.
KRANZBERG. No, no! I had law. But those noodles are always canting about equity and natural justice; and one is obliged to do so too, till it is enough to make one sick.
CORMAN. To be sure this last effect is rather sickening.
KRANZBERG. And thy untimely bantering is little better. Say what thou wilt, I know that I stand in as good credit with the world as any man in our imperial city. But who comes here? Pshaw! It is Ardusoffe; I must on with my buckrams again.
Enter Ardusoffe. ARDUSOFFE. Sir, I am come from the prison of your unhappy
 
kinsman, on a most earnest suit, which your known goodness and humanity will not, I am confident, suffer you to refuse.
KRANZBERG. Speak it plainly and freely, Sir. He is, indeed, unhappy, and I am little less so, in being forced to prosecute a near relation for such an atrocious deed. You don't know how much I feel on this unfortunate occasion.
ARDUSOFFE. Better, perhaps, than you are aware of. Your inward dispositions are too well depicted on your countenance to leave any one in doubt of your real worth. My present suit will give you an    opportunity of proving your professions. I come most earnestly to request that you will use your interest with the judges to have this trial put off for a few weeks.
KRANZBERG. Ah, good Ardusoffe! would that my bounden duty to society did not pull me the contrary way; and I would, on my bended knees, pray that it might be put off, not only for a few weeks, but a few months, a few years; ay, for ever.
ARDUSOFFE. Nay, nay! you exceed in tender sympathy: a few weeks is all that we desire, and I will this
 
moment go with you to the judges to beseech them to grant us this indulgence.
KRANZBERG. No, that won't do; I must go to the judges alone. On such occasions a third party creates embarrassment. You understand me?
ARDUSOFFE. I think I do, Sir; and will trust to your exertions accordingly.
KRANZBERG. My dear Sir, you do not understand me. I will leave no entreaty untried to gain what you desire for your client. But what is your object in this delay? is there any witness that could exculpate your client, who might be summoned in that time?
ARDUSOFFE. Yes; this is our reason for soliciting delay.
KRANZBERG.    And who is this witness? and from what place do you call him?
ARDUSOFFE drawing back from him. That is a matter, good Sir, less material for you to know than for us to conceal.
KRANZBERG. Very true; I should have remembered this: I respect you for your caution, though it is not
 
my way of proceeding. I am so free and open myself, that I forget the prudent habits of concealment, which may be commendable in others. And now I will honestly tell you that I am certain my suit to the judges for delay will be of no avail.
ARDUSOFFE. That you are certain, may be true; for you can make it so.
KRANZBERG. You mistake me again. But I am not angry at this. I can forgive the jealousy which arises from the excess of laudable zeal; and to prove this I will frankly serve your client in the only way in my power. I will gain over the guard, who are appointed for this evening's watch, and favour his escape from prison. Do you pause at this when there is such damning evidence against him?
ARDUSOFFE drily. I shall report to him what you say.
KRANZBERG. At the hour of twilight he will find his prison    doors unbarred, and let him come forth fearlessly.
ARDUSOFFE. I will go forthwith and report to him what you say.
                                         Exit.
 
KRANZBERG. Have I cozened that suspicious fellow at last? Re-enter Corman, who had retired upon Ardusoffe's coming in. I have cozened that suspicious fellow at last. If Van Maurice be caught making his escape, the trial will proceed immediately. The bright thought came into my head of a sudden; I wonder I did not think of it before.
CORMAN. But if he were really to escape and be outlawed, would not that serve your turn sufficiently.
KRANZBERG. Ay, if the present senior judge were to retain his office; but he will resign it in a month to one who is most partially attached to the family of Van Maurice. No, no! we should have him returning from his outlawry again, and submitting to a mock trial, which would declare him innocent, and restore him to his rights. No, no! the trial must proceed immediately; and it will do so if he be caught in an attempt to escape.
CORMAN. Think you he will fall into the snare?
KRANZBERG. I think he will; I am sure he will: and even if he should refuse, we can raise a great clamour
 
and confusion about the prison walls as if he had    attempted it, which may turn to our account nearly as well as the reality. I say our, for thou knowest well that when I take possession of the inheritance, a good portion of it will fall to thy share. Let me have my meal first, and I'll give thee thy directions about this matter afterwards.
CORMAN. It is ready, Sir.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE V. Before the walls of a Prison: a Sentinel is discovered walking to and fro by an arched Gateway, and several Men muffled in cloaks, peeping occasionally from behind an outer buttress near the front. A small Door at the further end of the arch opens slowly, and Ardusoffe enters by it, through the gateway, his face hid by his cloak. SENTINEL. Ho! you pass not so slily as you think: who are you? let me see your face?
ARDUSOFFE in a feigned voice. A friend to the noble prisoner, and the same who passed into that door half an hour ago.

 
SENTINEL. Thou dost not speak with the same voice, I'm certain.
ARDUSOFFE. Nay, my good friend; thine ears are deceived by thine own suspicion. In a whisper. Behold my face; dost thou not remember it?
                                         Going close to the Sentinel and turning his back to the front of the Stage, he uncovers his face for a moment, on which the other, with a nod, suffers him to pass. He then proceeds on his way, and is about to go off, when Corman and his companions burst upon him from behind the buttress. CORMAN. We seize thee in the name of the law.
ARDUSOFFE still concealing his face. Go to! you mistake me for another; suffer me to pass. Ye have no right to detain me.
CORMAN. Come under the lamp here, and let us see your face.
                                         They drag him towards the light, he making great resistance, when Kranzberg enters suddenly and lays hold of him.
 
KRANZBERG. Resistance is in vain, Van Maurice: we seize thee in the act of making escape from prison; and in the name of the state we secure thee.
ARDUSOFFE uncovering his face, and speaking in his natural voice. I make no resistance to the will of the state, signified to me by such a worthy member thereof.
KRANZBERG. Ardusoffe!
ARDUSOFFE. Yea, the same, and thy accomplice in endeavouring to persuade a prisoner to escape from the hands of justice. Seeing him look round significantly to Corman, who, thereupon, draws the other men to a distance.    What, art thou afraid those men should hear us; thou who art so free and open, even to imprudence? Thou wilt become a character of perfection by and by, since thou correctest thy errors so completely.
KRANZBERG. Is Van Maurice then so assured of his innocence that he refuses to fly?
ARDUSOFFE. Yes; right well assured of that or of thy perfidy; either assurance was sufficient; and if the one be as well grounded as the other, there is a
 
higher agent at work for his deliverance than thou hast any knowledge of.
KRANZBERG. What agent?
ARDUSOFFE. Providence, which protects the innocent, and returns the cruelty of the wicked into his own portion.
KRANZBERG. Art thou become his confessor, too? Why dost thou detain me here with thy homilies?
ARDUSOFFE smiling archly. Being so artless thyself, thou canst not possibly guess my reason.
KRANZBERG furiously. He has escaped! Ho, there!—to the search! to the pursuit! the prisoner has escaped.  Corman and the others run to him, and he gives them orders confusedly. Go by the street, no—by the south walk—no, no, give the alarm there— lose not a moment.
                                         Great bustle; running different ways, while the alarm bell rings from the tower. ARDUSOFFE aside, as he goes off.    Let him take this alarm for his pains: would what he apprehends were true!
                                         Exit.
 
CORMAN to Kranzberg . Perhaps it would be better to enter the prison first, and ascertain if the prisoner be really absent from his cell.
KRANZBERG. Thou'rt right; let us go immediately.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE VI. The House of the Senior Judge. Enter the Judge with a paper in his hand, followed by his Secretary. JUDGE. as they enter. And tell my worthy colleague that I wish to have a conference with him, as soon as possible, on the subject of this petition to put off the trial for a month. It comes from those who must at least be treated with respect. What noise is that without? Go, see what it is.
                                         Exit Secretary. While the Judge employs himself reading other papers, re-enter Secretary. SECRETARY. There has been an attempt to favour the prisoner's
 
escape, and the whole neighbourhood has been in commotion.
JUDGE. But he has not escaped?
SECRETARY. They believe not. Shall I go with the message?
JUDGE. By no means, till we see how the matter stands. Enter Kranzberg. You come in good time, Kranzberg: know you any thing of this escape, or attempted escape, of Van Maurice?
KRANZBERG. An escape has no doubt been attempted, and has been as certainly foiled. But there is such a confusion of accounts, that it would be difficult to come at the real truth, as is generally the case in such matters.
JUDGE. It is very bad to petition for delay, and in the mean time attempt to elude justice.
KRANZBERG. The cause, I fear, is desperate, and that must
 
   be their excuse who counsel the unhappy man; and it is for you now to consider whether, after this account, any request for deferring the trial should be granted.
JUDGE. Granted! most assuredly not. Ought it to be?
KRANZBERG. It becomes not me to give any opinion as to that, though I must confess it might be dangerous: my errand here has a different object.
JUDGE. Speak out, worthy Kranzberg; what is it?
KRANZBERG. It is my earnest request that, in judging of my unhappy kinsman, you would cast this attempt from your consideration altogether, and let no mention of it be made in court.
JUDGE. Is it not an additional proof of guilt?
KRANZBERG. Nay, my very learned and excellent Sir, do not so consider it. Who would not, in similar circumstances, with such strong presumptive evidence against him, do the same thing, even if he were conscious of being innocent? Life is
 
sweet to every one, and the jeopardy of it appalling.
JUDGE. Thy humanity equals thy candour.—But thou art too tender on this point.
KRANZBERG. Do not say so, my excellent Sir. Let not this untoward attempt act on your mind to the prejudice    of my miserable kinsman, if other evidence be not sufficient to condemn him.
JUDGE. Let it be as thou wilt, then; but we must have no delays. The trial shall commence tomorrow at the hour which was originally fixed. Excuse me, I am busy now; good night.
                                         Exit. KRANZBERG. Well, thanks to my good stars! I am not baffled, though I have been deceived. Matters still go as I wish.
                                         Exit.
 
ACT III. SCENE I. — Van Maurice's House; an Anteroom in the Apartment of Rosella. Enter Margaret and a Maid Servant, by opposite sides. MARGARET. I hope thy lady is still asleep?
MAID. O, no! I wish she were. She called me a few minutes since, and I am going to her again.
MARGARET. Is she aware how long she has slept?
MAID. No; she thinks it still early, and I have not undeceived her.
MARGARET. Thou hast done right, Jeanette. Ha! she is up already!
Enter Rosella. ROSELLA. I have had a deep and death-like sleep. It
 
was strange that I should sleep so at such a time as this.
MARGARET. And you feel yourself refreshed, I hope?
ROSELLA. I know not: I waked in confused bewilderment, which gave me a few moments of idiot-like insensibility; but the dismal truth broke upon me at once: it was the blow of a leaden mace upon my breast; I had better not have slept at all. But I am early enough to get to him ere he leave the prison. Looking at a timepiece on the wall of the room. Good heaven! it is long past the hour! he is already at the court, and I have not seen him. Why was I not called? Bring me my mantle. No, I'll stay for nothing.
                                         As she is about to go off, she is stopped by the entering of a Servant. SERVANT. There is a person below, who would speak    with you, lady, on particular and important business.
ROSELLA. His business should be such, indeed, who comes at an hour like the present.
MARGARET to Servant. Didst thou ever see him before?

 
SERVANT. I can scarcely say, Madam; his face is so concealed by his bonnet and the buttoned-up collar of his cloak: but he is tall, and somewhat stately.
ROSELLA. Let him come to me immediately.                                          Exit Servant. To Margaret and the Maid. Leave me; I would see him alone.
MARGARET. I dare not leave you, you tremble so.
ROSELLA. Don't mind that, but leave me.
                                         Exit Margaret, &c.
If it should be! I fear—why do I fear?
Should I not wish it earnestly? Wild thought!
For such a quick return no natural means
Could have effected: him it cannot be. Enter Claudien in disguise.                                          She remains motionless, eyeing him from head to foot, while he looks round to ascertain that there be nobody in the room, and then discovers himself, on which she utters a suppressed cry.
Thou here! O, Claudien, wherefore art thou come?
 

But oh! I know it well;—thou should'st be here.
My brother must not die. CLAUDIEN.
Must not, and shall not, be thou well assured.
Thou know'st it then; he has to thee reveal'd? ROSELLA.
To me nor no one else has he reveal'd it. CLAUDIEN.
Yet is it known to thee. ROSELLA.
I have by instinct learnt it. This poor heart!
Fear and affection have divined the truth.
   The horror he express'd when I proposed
To write to thee and hasten thy return,
Came like a flash of lightning on my mind,
And then the truth was instantly reveal'd. CLAUDIEN.
Noble Van Maurice! generous, matchless friend!
Be comforted, my dearest; he is safe. ROSELLA.
But thou art not—O, thou art not, my Claudien!                                          Wringing her hands distractedly.
Alas, alas! we're dreadfully beset.
The innocent must not die; and with the guilty
 

Is twined the dearest chord of my existence.
Oh, words of misery! to call thee guilty! Taking his hands and pressing them tenderly.
There has been blood upon these hands—I know it;
But 'twas the blood of a fell enemy
Who would have shed thy blood; and may I not
Press them and bless thee still? CLAUDIEN.
Thou precious creature! thy affection gleams
Like sunshine through one solitary loophole,
In a dark firmament of gather'd clouds,
That gilds one spot of ocean, hill or plain,
With brightness beautiful though circumscribed.
Thou cheer'st my soul, and be thou also cheer'd!
I must and I will save thy brother's life.
And for that thou hast made my own so precious,
I will be wary to preserve it also. ROSELLA.
Yes, thou shalt live; for heaven has been thy help,
   Else thou couldst never, in so short a time,
Have reach'd this shore again. CLAUDIEN.
The gale was rough; the ship was driven back
Upon the breakers of a rocky shore;
But I swam stoutly, and, when quite exhausted,
I caught a floating raft and gain'd the shore.
 
ROSELLA.
'T was Providence preserved thee: thanks to Heaven!
And will preserve thee still. CLAUDIEN.
                                         That is my trust. ROSELLA.
But, O, be cautious! I will go forthwith
And to the Court declare the simple truth,
As to the deed, yet speaking of thee still
As one far distant in another land.
I am bold now; I am braced for the task;
Trust it to me. CLAUDIEN.
Forbear, thou heart of tenderness and courage!
I've better means than this to save thy brother. ROSELLA eagerly.
And save thyself besides? CLAUDIEN.
Yes, even so; my life is precious now:
Thou'st made it so. There is no time, my love,
For further explanation. Fare thee well!
I'm glad that I have seen thee first; have heard
Thy words of strong affection, and have felt
This dear and gentle hand press'd to my heart.
Farewell, farewell!
 
ROSELLA.
   Thy voice sounds sadly, as though many a league
Were going to divide us. How is this?
Farewell pronounced with such solemnity! CLAUDIEN.
But there be other obstacles than distance
May separate the dearest. ROSELLA.
I apprehend thee well;—the prison's walls,—
The dungeon and the chain.—O, God of heaven!
Seizing him wildly. Thou shalt not go; thou shalt not leave this house:
I'll lock thee up within my chamber; go
To this dread Court myself; I have no fear,
For Heaven will teach me what I ought to say
When I am there; will give me words of power
To save a brother's life—ay, and a life
Dear as a brother's. Now I feel assuredly
I shall prevail. There is no time to lose:
Go to my chamber; haste thee to the cover.                                          Dragging him to the door of an inner room. CLAUDIEN.
Art thou not mad, Rosella? ROSELLA dragging him still.
Not mad; but thou wilt make me so: haste, haste—
 

Alas! I have no strength; but let my weakness
Compel thee, generous Claudien!                                          Kneeling to him. CLAUDIEN.
Dear love! alarm bereaves thee of thy reason,
If thou believ'st thy chamber would protect me.
Shouldst thou before the judges speak of me,
As of an absent man! would they believe thee?
Thy servants too; they have admitted here
   A stranger muffled up in mystery,
And must confess they saw him not depart.
Thou'lt run me into danger from the dread
And apprehension of it.—
Withhold me not; I will be very prudent;
I will not rashly risk my life. No longer
Must I remain; moments are precious now;
Let me depart. ROSELLA.
Go instantly; I am a hateful wretch
To keep thee here so long.                                          Catching hold of him as he hurries off.
Button thee closer, take this handkerchief,
And press it to thy mouth like one in pain.                                          Giving a handkerchief. CLAUDIEN.
I thank thee, kind Rosella. Going.
 
ROSELLA running after him again.
Halt in thy gait, and stoop thy shoulders too;
Thy step and graceful bearing will betray thee. CLAUDIEN.
Trust me, my love; I'll not betray myself.                                          Exit.                                           Rosella alone, who continues to pace to and fro in a hurried way, and presently Margaret enters. MARGARET.
My dear friend— ROSELLA.
Who art thou? MARGARET.
                                         Dost thou not know me?
I met the stranger going hence, and thought
I might return to thee: have I done wrong?                                           Rosella gives no answer, but walks about as before.
Move not so rapidly, my dear Rosella,
But let thy body have a little rest. ROSELLA.
Cease! thou art foolish; should my body rest,
My mind would go distracted. MARGARET.
   Walk as much as thou wilt within thy chamber,
Where no one will observe thee. Take my arm—
Heaven aid and pity thee, poor sufferer,
There is a cruel conflict in thy breast.                                          Exeunt.
 
SCENE II. A narrow Lobby or Passage, leading to the Hall of Justice. Several People discovered, passing or loitering about. Enter Father Francis. FATHER FRANCIS to an Under Officer. Stop, friend: thou art from the court?
OFFICER. Ay, with half the learning even of a monk, you may guess that.
FATHER FRANCIS. Thou shalt enjoy thy joke unanswered, Officer. Thou art by office indifferent to the fate of an unhappy panel; but thou wert an obliging fellow once, before thou wert spoilt by preferment, and now thou canst do me a favour.
OFFICER. Mention it, good Father. I ought to have reverenced your cloth for your sake, if I do not reverence you for the sake of your cloth.

 
FATHER FRANCIS. Has the advocate for the prisoner finished his defence?
OFFICER. Ay, Heaven be thanked! I thought it would never have an end. He has just concluded it.
FATHER FRANCIS. Return to the court, then, and desire him to come to me here, without loss of time. I have something of importance to communicate to him.
OFFICER. I will, Father.
                                         Exit. FATHER FRANCIS. Woe is me that human nature should come to this! The pride and spirits of that creature, now, rise on an occasion like this. The condemnation or execution of a fellow-creature    creates no other feeling in him but the enjoyment of increased importance and comparative security! Yet there was some good in him once. Pauses thoughtfully. There was good in him once: his first confession consisted of one petty crime, for which he seemed to be most penitent. But the steps of the confessional is a spot which he has long forsaken.

 
Enter Ardusoffe. ARDUSOFFE. You have something to communicate, good Father?
FATHER FRANCIS. Move a little this way: I have words for thy ear in secret.
ARDUSOFFE. Has any thing occurred to throw light on this mystery? any thing in favour of my unhappy client? who comports himself with the sober dejection of a man resigned to his fate, though he firmly asserts his innocence; and I, so help me God! as firmly believe him.
FATHER FRANCIS. I am glad thou dost.
ARDUSOFFE. I could sit down and weep for his sake, he has so wound himself round my heart in the course of this dismal transaction.
FATHER FRANCIS. Be comforted, my son; thou canst do better things for him than that.
ARDUSOFFE. Instruct me, reverend Father.

 
FATHER FRANCIS.    Produce in court the voluntary evidence of his confessor.
ARDUSOFFE. How is this? You said to me last night that he had confessed nothing.
FATHER FRANCIS. There is no time to question me on this point now. I shall presently present myself before the judges, as evidence to exculpate the prisoner; and when the oath has been administered— I pray thee move further this way: we may be overheard.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE III. The Hall of Justice. Two Judges sitting in state; the Prisoner at the Bar; Kranzberg and Borion, and all the Attendants, &c. of a full Court. SENIOR JUDGE. Maurice Van Maurice, baron and citizen of this imperial city, we have heard your defence from the mouth of your advocate, pled with eloquence and ability, though opposed to much strong uncontradicted evidence against you: is
 
there any thing further which you wish to urge in your own behalf?
                                          Van Maurice remains silent. JUNIOR JUDGE. Baron; if you can offer any good plea why the sentence of the law should not be pronounced against you, as the murderer of your kinsman, Baron Hartman, let not this opportunity pass. We must otherwise proceed without delay.
VAN MAURICE. Most honourable judges: The evidences against me are so strong, that I am compelled to confess, were such insufficient to convict a prisoner, there is scarcely a panel who at this or any other bar could be convicted. I have nothing to urge against your sentence, but that which I know you cannot and ought not to receive,—a simple and unqualified assertion of mine own innocence.
SENIOR JUDGE. There is no occasion to say further.
VAN MAURICE. Pardon me, my Lord, there is occasion; and I am permitted so to do.
SENIOR JUDGE.    Proceed, then.

 
VAN MAURICE. I am well aware that an assertion of mine own innocence cannot be received for my exculpation, even when I recall to your consideration, that I am the son of an honourable father, who has served the state in the senate and the field, and shed his blood for that service in the only way in which it becomes blood to be shed, that is derived from a source so honourable: that I have been reared under his eye, in rectitude and truth, which has never yet on any occasion been impugned: that love of worldly wealth, the only motive for committing the crime with which I am charged, is a propensity from which I am known to be altogether free. It cannot, I repeat, be received for my exculpation, but may surely, when joined to such considerations, well justify your acceding to my earnest request, that you would grant me three weeks' delay, ere your verdict be pronounced, that I may if possible prove mine innocence.

Yes, I request it earnestly; for who,
Of woman born, shrinks not from death inflicted
Before the gazing eyes of multitudes,—
Inflicted with disgrace. I do entreat you,
   For that I leave behind me those most dear,
Who will, if such my punishment, receive
A stroke more terrible than headsman's axe,
The wretch's momentary bane, can give.—
 

I do beseech ye, for that ye yourselves
Hereafter may be wrung with deep compunction,
When the good citizens of Lubeck, moved
With gratitude for the brave father, coupled
With pity for the son of such a parent,
Shall scowl upon ye as you pass along
Her public streets, as those who, in his misery,
Denied some weeks of respite to the offspring
Of their once loved commander.
I do appeal to all within these walls,
The citizens of this my native city;
I do appeal to every honest man
Of whate'er town or kingdom; yea, to those
Who, banish'd forth from the community
Of social man, have but the forest waste
For their wild home, and for their polity
The light of untaught reason, whether this,
Your pitiless refusal of my suit,
Be not at enmity with every sympathy
Of common nature. I appeal to all. MANY VOICES at once. He's right, he's right; he speaks good reason,    sooth!
SENIOR JUDGE. Silence in the court.
VAN MAURICE looking round on the spectators.
Ye pity me, and I do thank you for it.
 

I know I shall hereafter be restored
To lost esteem and good men's love.—Alas!
The fisherman in his small boat, when drifted
To the wild cat'ract's brink, is seen no more
Till, from the boiling nether gulph cast up,
Amid the fierce turmoil of warring eddies,
Jagg'd rocks and churning foam, a sorry sight
Of mangled, stripp'd, and sever'd limbs appears.
I may be so restored, with praise shed o'er me
As unavailing as the rainbow tints,
That through the cat'ract's cloudy spray may gleam
Upon the perish'd wretch. Enter Ardusoffe and Father Francis. SENIOR JUDGE. Again I say, keep silence in the court! Turning to the prisoner. You aver that you are innocent; and if this be so, it is at least known to you, who is the guilty person. Name him, then, that justice may take its course, and you shall have full time allowed you to prove your assertion. Refusing to do this, you become your own destroyer, and have no right to cast the blame upon us.
VAN MAURICE. I have said, my Lords, that I cannot do this    without betraying confidence; and were I to do so, should I deserve to be believed in any
 
thing I might reveal? He who betrays confidence to save himself, may utter falsehoods also from the same urgent temptation.
SENIOR JUDGE. And this is your determination?
                                          Van Maurice bows. JUNIOR JUDGE. You screw your sense of honour, noble Baron, to the romantic pitch. Consider better of it. Is this your final determination?  Van Maurice bows again. Then, though most painfully, we must proceed to give sentence as the law directs.
ARDUSOFFE advancing. Stop, my Lords. In this extremity, I am warranted to bring forward evidence to exculpate my client, which might not otherwise have been justifiable. This holy Father hath that to reveal which concerns the life and honour of the prisoner, and I claim that he may be heard.
SENIOR JUDGE. Reveal penitential confessions!
ARDUSOFFE. Yes, my Lord, to save the life of an innocent person; and show me that law of God or man which forbids it.

 
JUNIOR JUDGE. He must speak upon oath.
ARDUSOFFE. Let it be administered to him as you please.
SENIOR JUDGE. Let him be sworn.
                                          Father Francis is led to the further end of the hall, where the oath is administered to him in dumb show. He then advances slowly to the front, as if unwell. ARDUSOFFE.    What is the matter, good father?
FATHER FRANCIS. I am somewhat faint; may I be permitted to withdraw for a few moments?
ARDUSOFFE after looking to the Judges, who nod assent. You are permitted.
                                         Exit Father Francis. KRANZBERG. This monk, methinks, is strangely seized on the sudden. Will a lie or two choke a friar?
ARDUSOFFE to Kranzberg . If thou canst find one man in Lubeck who doubts the veracity of Father Francis, make that a plea for setting aside his evidence: thou hast my leave to do so.

 
VAN MAURICE aside to Ardusoffe . Has Father Francis confessed any one concerned in this matter?
ARDUSOFFE aside to Van Maurice . Why else should he volunteer this evidence?
After a pause, enter Claudien, disguised as Father Francis. SENIOR JUDGE. Declare to us what thou knowest of this atrocious deed.
CONFESSOR. That which is only known to Heaven, the prisoner, and myself, I will declare; and nothing but the truth shall pass these lips.
SENIOR JUDGE. Proceed without further prelude.
CONFESSOR. The panel at your bar was, on the fatal evening when Baron Hartman was slain—
KRANZBERG. Gentle expression! I should say—murdered.
JUNIOR JUDGE. Interrupt not the witness.
CONFESSOR. Well, be it termed as you please. I say, he, your panel, was the whole of that evening
 
   shut up within the walls of his own library, when Count Claudien, his friend, entered the room by a private door from the garden, with blood on his hands and agony in his heart.
VAN MAURICE. Thou liest, false priest! I made to thee no such confession. Mine own sins, and mine own alone, were revealed to thee. To the Judges. Regard not what he says, for he is perjured.
JUNIOR JUDGE. Silence! do not interrupt him: it is for us to judge of this matter. To the Confessor. Proceed.
CONFESSOR. He entered, as I have said, with blood upon his hands, and told, in much agony of mind, to this, your noble prisoner, that he had been, a short half-hour before, attacked near the ramparts by Baron Hartman, who rushed furiously upon him with his drawn sword: that they fought, and Hartman was disarmed; upon which he treacherously drew his dagger, attempting to stab him; but he, this Claudien, being the stronger man, threw the other upon the ground, and bent over him with one knee upon his breast. A pause.

 
SENIOR JUDGE. Proceed; art thou ill again?
ARDUSOFFE. He will recover breath presently; give him time.
CONFESSOR.    In this position were those unfortunate adversaries, when Hartman, in passion, uttered words most false and injurious of a lady beloved by Claudien; upon which, this unhappy Claudien drew his own dagger from his belt, and stabbed him to the heart. That was the blood-stained dagger found in the apartment of Van Maurice.
VAN MAURICE.
I can forbear no longer; if this monk
Tell such a tale as drawn from my confession,
By all most sacred held in earth or heaven,
He lies a thousand times! CONFESSOR. But wilt thou also swear that Claudien came not into thy library on that fatal night, and told thee a story similar to that which I now repeat?
VAN MAURICE.
Do not beset me thus! the Count is absent,
And cannot now defend himself. Whatever
May be your good intentions in my favour,
As friendly aid I utterly reject them.
 
KRANZBERG. Will any one be fooled by such bungling jugglers playing into one another's hands so palpably?
BORION. Most honourable Judges, I think you cannot admit of such evidence as this. There is collusion here.
SENIOR JUDGE. Is there any farther evidence to produce? A pause. I presume there is none.
                                         The Judges confer closely together in dumb show, while the Prisoner and others speak in an under-voice. VAN MAURICE beckoning to the Confessor.    Come this way, friar.
KRANZBERG. No speaking privately to a witness in court.
ARDUSOFFE. The evidence being closed, it may now be admitted.
VAN MAURICE.
Come hither, stealthy monk, for holy father
I never more may call thee. Beckoning as before.
Confessor goes nearer. So unwilling!
What fiend of darkness hast thou tamper'd with?
 

No earthly man but one could to thy ear
What thou reveal'st convey, and he's far distant. CONFESSOR in a low voice to Van Maurice .
Not far distant, Maurice.                                           Van Maurice pushes him away, and with an eager expression of countenance points to the door; then sitting hastily down, remains in a stooping posture, covering his face with his hands. KRANZBERG to Ardusoffe . We shall know presently what all those juggling deceptions of yours will produce. Thou hast trained thy actors to admiration. But honesty is the best policy after all; this good saying I have always maintained.
ARDUSOFFE. As far as words will go, sapient Sir; and the fate of thy last night's treachery has confirmed it. A laudable consistency of character, when both words and actions teach the same lesson.
VAN MAURICE starting up. They are long of coming to a decision.
ARDUSOFFE. Nay, they have consulted but a little while.
VAN MAURICE. I have sat on that bench a long time.

 
ARDUSOFFE. But a few minutes, dear Baron.
VAN MAURICE looking to Confessor, who stands at a distance. Not yet gone!
ARDUSOFFE. Did you expect him to go?
VAN MAURICE.    My understanding had left me: I knew not what to expect.
ARDUSOFFE. Hush! the Judges are preparing to pronounce sentence.
VAN MAURICE looking up fearfully. Is it for life or death? Averting his eyes hastily. It is not life.
SENIOR JUDGE. Baron Van Maurice, having duly considered the evidence against you, and that also which has been produced in your favour, we feel ourselves constrained to pronounce upon you the sentence of the law. And forasmuch as murders have, of late years, become more frequent amongst people of noble condition, we see good to revive, upon this occasion, a law which has been too long laid aside.—Maurice Van Maurice, for this atrocious murder which you have committed,
 
we condemn you to be broken alive upon the wheel; and to-morrow, before mid-day, this sentence shall be executed on your mortal body. May God be merciful to your immortal soul, which you have put into such fearful jeopardy!
                                          Van Maurice stands motionless on the spot; a murmur of horror sounds through the hall, Kranzberg alone looking triumphant; while the the Confessor sinks into the arms of Ardusoffe, who prevents him from falling on the ground. OFFICER OF THE COURT. Undo his cowl, and give him a cup of water.
ARDUSOFFE drawing his cowl still closer. Let him alone. It is only a momentary weakness: he revives.
CONFESSOR aside to Ardusoffe . Let go thy hold: I am well now, and think I    shall be strong. Advancing with a stately step in front of the Judges. My Lords, I needs must strongly raise my voice against this sentence which ye have pronounced upon a man most innocent.

O, more than innocent! a man most virtuous.
Ay, more than virtuous; e'en to honour's summit
Most nobly raised, whereon he stands aloft,
 

'Twixt heaven and earth, so godlike, that the mind
Scarcely believes this nether world of sin
Hath been his previous home.—He is most guiltless. SENIOR JUDGE. What proof givest thou of this, and who art thou who hast twice this day addressed us with mien and air so varied, and two such different voices?—
CONFESSOR dropping his disguise. The man who did the deed: the unhappy Claudien.
SENIOR JUDGE. And thou confessest thyself to be the murderer of Hartman?
CLAUDIEN.
You call it murder—so it may be called.
He at the moment lay unarm'd; I, therefore,
Can make no plea of self-defence. But murder,
Deliberately devised, ne'er stain'd these hands:
And if there be a man in this assembly
Who loves a virtuous woman—such, I trow,
   In every court and crowd are to be found—
Let him declare how he should feel on hearing
Her fair name outraged by a sland'rous tongue,
The caitiff struggling to elude his grasp:
And if a fatal stroke by rage inflicted
 

He can in conscience deem deliberate bloodshed,
Being so circumstanced, I am a murderer. JUNIOR JUDGE. How camest thou hither? Didst thou not sail in the Mermaid, bound for Copenhagen?
CLAUDIEN. I did: but agony of mind wrung from me, unawares, some words of exclamation and disclosure, which one of the crew overheard; and when that tempest, which lately rocked your walls, began to vex our course, and put the ship in peril, this man accused me as a murderer. The frightened mariners would no longer share the risk with such an unblessed passenger, and I was cast into the deep.
JUNIOR JUDGE. Fearful extremity! How wert thou preserved?
CLAUDIEN.
I swam while strength remain'd, and then embraced
A floating plank, which bore me to the land.
The tempest and the sea had pity on me;
And will ye then destroy what they have spared?
I beg for mercy: I am not ashamed
To ask, ay, to implore your clemency;
 

   For, guilty as I am, I am so circumstanced
That life is dear to me.                                          Pointing to Van Maurice, who is now on his knees, stretching out his hands to the Judges, but unable to speak. And see, who kneels before you! one who knelt not for his own life; who never, till this moment, bent his honoured knee but to that Almighty Judge, who hath commanded weak and erring men to be merciful, that they may obtain mercy.
                                         The Judges whisper to one another. JUNIOR JUDGE. Thy case, Count Claudien, is piteous, though thou art very guilty. We must withdraw awhile before we make any reply to thy appeal for mercy.
                                         The Judges withdraw.                                           Claudien, turning to Van Maurice, spreads out his arms, and the latter, rushing into them, strains him to his bosom. VAN MAURICE. Who would not live or die for such a man? My noble friend! but thou shalt live. The very stones of these walls will cry out against them, if they have not mercy on thee.
KRANZBERG. If the Judges suffer themselves to be deluded
 
with all this mummery, they are no true successors of King Solomon.
VAN MAURICE. Deceit dwells within thine own miserable breast, and thou perceivest deceit in every thing.
KRANZBERG. There is little penetration required in this case. It is a mighty convenient thing to have the dagger of a friend and brother-in-law to clear one's way to a rich inheritance.
VAN MAURICE. Thou liest most foully and most wickedly.
KRANZBERG drawing from his cloak a concealed weapon, and rushing furiously on him.    The lie to me! thou half-condemned felon!
CLAUDIEN doing the same, and putting himself between them. Attack an unarmed man, thou hellish caitiff!                                          They fight, and Ardusoffe and others endeavour to part them, but cannot effect it, till Claudien has run Kransberg through the body, and received a wound from him. This hand of mine is fated to shed blood. Caitiff as he is, I wish I had not slain him.

 
ARDUSOFFE. See how he gathers in his wrung and withering features, as if he cursed us all in the very agonies of death.
CLAUDIEN. Say not so! say not so! Who can divine the thoughts of a dying man, be he ever so wicked? —He is dead now, and I may soon be as him.
VAN MAURICE alarmed. What sayest thou? There is blood from thy side: thou art wounded.
CLAUDIEN. I am faint and sick: let me have air, I pray you.
Re-enter the Judges, and resume their seats. SENIOR JUDGE. This is our decision. Forasmuch as the murder of Hartman was not a premeditated act, but perpetrated, though unjustifiably, in a moment of provocation and passion; and further, that the criminal hath delivered himself up to justice, making full confession of the crime, we remit the punishment of death, and condemn the Count Claudien of Denmark to perpetual banishment from the city and territories of Lubeck. In four and twenty hours from this time, thou must
 
depart. Being ever again seen within the realm,    after that period, death, according to the utmost rigour of the law, is thy portion.
CLAUDIEN. I thank your clemency. If my soul and body keep together so long, I will obey you; but if otherwise, ye will not refuse to my mortal remains a spot of earth for their resting-place, and the dust of your land to cover them.—This is my request:—that I lie—may lie where my friend— Struggling in vain to keep down his emotion. —I thank your clemency.
                                         Is supported by Van Maurice.  JUNIOR JUDGE descending hastily from his seat. What means this? has he slain himself?— And who lies here? Kranzberg dead, and bathed in blood! Such outrage in a court of justice!—Who permitted it? Every one present is answerable to the law for this.
ARDUSOFFE. Kranzberg, in the rage of disappointment, was, as Borion and all here present can witness, the aggressor. We endeavoured to separate them, but ere we could effect it, these bleeding wounds were given and received.

 
Enter Rosella, joyfully. ROSELLA.
I have heard it—I have heard the joyful tidings! To Van Maurice. 
Thou art acquitted and Claudien not condemn'd.
Ay, well may'st thou so hold him to thy heart!
I will embrace ye both. VAN MAURICE.
Forbear, dear sister; do not press upon him. ROSELLA.
   What is the matter? There is no joy here.
Claudien, thou'rt very pale; there's blood upon thee.
O, misery, misery! Wringing her hands. VAN MAURICE. Do not give way to such frantic lamentations; he is severely wounded, but may yet recover. Have patience and do not distract him with outrageous sorrow.
ROSELLA.
I will be patient! yes, I will be patient!
'T is Heaven chastises; I will bear it meekly.
But is there yet for me no sound of kindness,—
No dear word of affection, gentle Claudien,
From thy pale lips, so pale and so compress'd?
 

Alas, alas! thou look'st upon the ground,
And dost not look at me! VAN MAURICE. He is very faint, and hears not what thou sayest.
                                         She embraces the knees of Claudien, who sinks slowly to the ground, supported by Van Maurice and Ardusoffe, and the curtain drops.
 
Back matter NOTE TO “THE HOMICIDE.” As it has been thought, by a gentleman professionally conversant on these subjects, that the scene on board of ship is only fitted for a melodrama, and perhaps with justice, I have subjoined what follows, to be substituted in its room by any manager of a theatre, who may be of the same opinion, and who may, at the same time, consider this drama as worthy of representation. The simplest way, no doubt, would have been to have omitted the objectionable part altogether, and to have placed the following scenes in the body of the piece; but as my own opinion on the subject does not entirely coincide with that above mentioned, I have preferred this mode of removing the difficulty. Since our two principal theatres are of such large dimensions, and possess so many capabilities of effect from scenery and from light, I can see no reason why some of the divisions of a regular drama may not occasionally receive the advantage of such powerful auxiliaries. And, indeed, I am scarcely entitled to call this a regular piece, consisting, as it does, of three acts, and written chiefly in prose, that it might be the better adapted to a large theatre, in which blank verse cannot be so readily understood.

 
Scene  SCENE I. The Entrance-hall of a small Inn on the Sea-shore: knocking heard at the Door. Enter Landlady. LANDLADY. Who can it be, making such a noise at this untimely hour? In a loud voice. What do you want at this late hour? and who are you?
VOICE without. I am a storm-beaten, benighted traveller, and shelter for the night is what I want, good dame; open your door and receive me.
LANDLADY. You travel late for a lone person. Opens the door. Enter Claudien. Come in, then, and I will do the best I can for you. The rain must have fallen in torrents, methinks, to put you in this condition.
CLAUDIEN. Yes, I have had water enough, good dame; let me dry myself by the fire, if there be one still burning in the house.
LANDLADY after looking at him steadfastly. Preserve me! is the Mermaid gone a wreck?

 
CLAUDIEN. What sayest thou of the Mermaid?
LANDLADY. She sailed from port yesterday morning, and my poor boy is on board.
CLAUDIEN. Where he is still in safety, I doubt not; so make thyself easy, and blow up the embers of thy fire, that I may dry myself.
LANDLADY. Lord be gracious to me! Did I not see thee embark with the other passengers?—If that ship be sailing on the sea, what art thou? He remains silent, and she looks at him still more intently. In the name of the blessed Saints, depart from me! thou art nothing now that either fire may warm or roof may shelter. Leave me, in the holy name of St. Francis!
CLAUDIEN. Nay, if thou deny me succour, in my present condition, thou wilt make a ghost of me, indeed. Let me pass on to the fire, I beseech thee!
                                         Exit, passing her quickly, and she follows him, holding up her hands in amazement. SCENE II. The Sea-shore by early dawn. Enter Mariners and Passengers, carrying small packages and various matters in their hands. FIRST PASSENGER. Thank God we are on dry land again, though we be driven back to the same coast.

 
FIRST MARINER. And ship and cargo safe, too; you may thank me for that.
SECOND MARINER. Thank thee for it!
FIRST MARINER. Ay, marry! had we not lightened our vessel of that unhallowed murderer, she and all she contained would have been, long ere now, at the bottom.
FIRST PASSENGER. Say no more of that: it makes the blood turn in my veins to think of it. If all the unhallowed part of our living freight had been so disposed of, we should have come to shore most grievously curtailed of our numbers.
Enter Landlady, with a small basket. THIRD MARINER. By our blessed Lady! there comes my mother.
LANDLADY. My dear boy! art thou safe? Thou hast had a sad bout of it on that stormy sea, since I parted with thee yesterday morning.
FIRST MARINER. Good landlady, we are in want of food and a good fire to warm us by; show us the nearest way to thy house, which is not far off, as I guess.
LANDLADY pointing. Hold on your way along the shore, and I'll overtake you presently, when I have gathered a few more of these limpets.
                                         Exeunt Mariners, &c. Manent only Landlady and Third Mariner.
 
THIRD MARINER. May the devil choke them with the first morsel they eat I wish they would to to any house but thine.
LANDLADY. Why dost thou say so, my dear boy?
THIRD MARINER. I'll tell thee a secret, mother; I'll sail with those men no more, if I can effect my escape.
LANDLADY. What makes thee say so?
THIRD MARINER. I'll tell thee why, and in few words, too, though it is a story to make one's ears tingle. There was a noble passenger on board, and when the storm raged at its pitch, and we were in jeopardy, some exclamations which fell from his lips made one who stood near him imagine that he must needs be a murderer.
LANDLADY. Mercy on us! did he own himself such? remorse wrings strange tales from parched lips in the hour of danger.
THIRD MARINER. He confessed having shed blood, but with no deliberate intention; and I could pawn my life upon it that he spoke the truth. Yet those cowardly devils durst not abide the peril of the storm in his company.
LANDLADY tossing up her arms. And they cast him overboard!
THIRD MARINER. Nay: the stoutest of them all durst not lay a finger on him. He kept them off with his drawn sword, till he gained
 
the prow of the ship, which was driving towards land, and then, raising his arms to heaven I shall never forget the sight of his noble figure as the passing lightning gave it to our eyes for a moment, threw himself into the deep.
LANDLADY. It is, indeed, a fearful tale. But he is no murderer, I'll be sworn to it; and he is safe on shore at this moment, where he would never have been, had he done the deed of blood. He is in my house.
THIRD MARINER. Where those men must not find him. What shall we do?
LANDLADY. Run thou, and give him notice of their coming; and conduct him, if he pleases, to—,where he may get on board of some other vessel, and quit the country undiscovered.
THIRD MARINER. So I will, mother, and go to the world's end with him, too, if he will suffer me.
LANDLADY. Make haste; and I'll overtake those miscreants, and lead them to the house by any way but the nearest.
                                         Exeunt severally. NOTES

ARDUSOFFE
BOATSWAIN
BORION
CAPTAIN
CLAUDIEN
CONFESSOR
CORMAN
FATHER FRANCIS
FIRST MARINER
FIRST OFFICER
FIRST PASSENGER
FIRST SAILOR
FIRST SERVANT
HARTMAN
JACOME
JUDGE
JUNIOR JUDGE
KRANZBERG
KRANZBERG AND SECOND OFFICER
LANDLADY
MAID
MANY VOICES
MARGARET
OFFICER
OFFICER OF THE COURT
OTHER VOICES
ROSELLA
SECOND MARINER
SECOND OFFICER
SECOND SAILOR
SECRETARY
SENIOR JUDGE
SENTINEL
SERVANT
SERVANTS
THIRD MARINER
THIRD SAILOR
TURNKEY
VAN MAURICE
VOICE
VOICES

____________________________________________________________


Full text: THE MATCH A COMEDY. IN THREE ACTS.
 
Front matter  PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Sir Cameron Kunliffe.
Franklin, Relation to Sir Cameron.
Brightly, Friend to Sir Cameron.
Thornhill, Friend to Sir Cameron.
Master Lawry, an idle urchin, Brother to Emma.
Humphry.
Locksmith, Servants.
WOMEN. Latitia Vane.
Emma, her Niece.
Flounce, Waiting-maid to Latitia.
The Housekeeper of Sir Cameron.
Ladies, Servants, &c.
Scene, a Watering-place, and Sir Cameron's Seat in the neighbourhood.
 
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. —A low Parlour in a Lodging-house, with a Glass-door in the bottom of the Stage, opening into a Garden. Enter Brightly and Thornhill. BRIGHTLY after surveying the room. Yes, these apartments will do very well; and you shall have your study,—if a place with one shelf for books and a commodious chair to sleep in deserves the name,—overhead.
THORNHILL. But you forget the writing-table, the most important thing of all.
BRIGHTLY. Most important, indeed, for a poet who never writes any thing longer than a sonnet, making
 
progress at the astonishing rate of one couplet per day. The window-sill might do well enough for that.
THORNHILL. But you think of former times, my friend; rhyming becomes easier by practice.
BRIGHTLY. So it does, like all other things; and I dare say you can now write two couplets per day with no great difficulty.
THORNHILL. Don't trouble thy head about my progress; let us set out on our visit to Sir Cameron. His mansion is scarcely a mile off, I am told. He is a kind-hearted fellow; he will be glad to see us.
BRIGHTLY. Yes, if he do not take it into his head that we have some covert design in our visit.
THORNHILL. Some covert design!
BRIGHTLY. Ay; sounding his intentions as to standing    for the county: propitiating his patronage for some itinerant artist or lecturer: introducing to his acquaintance some forward chaperon, with a troop of female cousins at her back, to invade the daily peace of his home. O dear! what will
 
he not imagine, rather than that we are scampering about the country for holiday recreation, and have come ten miles out of our way to see him.
THORNHILL. You are somewhat hard upon him, methinks. Some events of his youth unhappily gave him a bad opinion of mankind; for myself, I never found him suspicious.
BRIGHTLY. If he thought you had wit enough to deceive him, it might be otherwise. You may thank your poetry, my dear Thornhill, for his confidence.
THORNHILL. Nay, spare me, dear Brightly; else I shall suppose thou art a poet thyself, under the rose, and canst not brook a rival.                                           Master Lawry, who appears in the garden with a bow and arrow in his hand, discharges his arrow through the glass-door, and breaks one of the panes. See that urchin in the garden; he has broken a pane of the window, and is running away.
BRIGHTLY. He sha'n't escape, however. Opens the window, runs after him, and returns dragging in Lawry by the collar. You need not struggle
 
with me, little master; I'll keep you fast. Why did you hit the window with your arrow?
LAWRY.    Because I meant to hit the door.
BRIGHTLY. I wish thou hadst been a better marksman. What will the landlady say to thee?
LAWRY. Ay, more words no doubt than I shall care to hear.—Ah, miss Aimy, miss Aimy! how many scrapes I get into by you!
BRIGHTLY. And who is miss Aimy, I pray?
LAWRY. My arrow, Sir: that is the name I give her.
THORNHILL. And a very appropriate one, methinks.
BRIGHTLY. But what is thine own name?
LAWRY. Which of them, Sir?
BRIGHTLY. How many hast thou?
LAWRY. Two godfathers, two grandfathers, and a
 
brace of uncles, have furnished me with names enow.—How many do they come to?
THORNHILL. Names enough, no doubt, for any one but a German Prince. What school dost thou attend?
LAWRY. None, sir.
THORNHILL. Who teaches thee to read and write?
LAWRY. Any body,—who has most time and most patience.
THORNHILL. But art thou not to be put to school?
LAWRY. Yes, Sir, when aunt Letty can make up her mind, whether the old floggum way, or the Pestilozi way, or the Hamiltonian fashion, is best for my learning; and whether a high situation, or    a warm situation, or an eastern exposure, or a western exposure, is best for my health; and whether three hundred schoolfellows, or fifty schoolfellows, or twenty schoolfellows, fagging or no fagging, be best for my morals.
BRIGHTLY. Ha! ha! ha! I will not ask whose nephew thou art. And thou hast a pretty sister too.

 
LAWRY. Yes, Sir; people do call her pretty, and she is civil enough to believe them.
BRIGHTLY. Out upon thee for a saucy knave!—Thine aunt is here then? And where does she live?
LAWRY. I can't tell you, Sir! When she has found out which of the twenty houses she has been looking at is the cheerfullest, and the cleanest, and the most convenient, I suppose she will settle in it.
BRIGHTLY. Go to her, my little master, and give my best respects, and say that an old friend will do himself the honour of waiting upon her presently.— Nay, you need not look at the broken pane so ruefully; I will satisfy the landlady on that point.                                          Leads Lawry into the garden, where he disappears amongst the bushes, then returning to the front. Ha! ha! ha! Well, I can't help laughing for the soul of me.
THORNHILL. What tickles you so much?
BRIGHTLY. Those two originals come in one another's way
 
   again. There was a report of a love affair between them several months ago, which went off upon some foolish difficulty or other; and now she comes here to place herself in his neighbourhood.
THORNHILL aside. I hope it is only to throw herself in his way. Aloud. Poh! it will all end, as it did before, in scruples, and fancies, and misapprehensions! Don't you think it will?
BRIGHTLY. I hope not: what a match they would make if it could be effected!
THORNHILL. How! Suspicion and indecision put together as yoke-fellows!
BRIGHTLY. Why not? If they are together, two people may lead an uneasy life, to be sure; but it will, in all probability, save four from being in the like condition.
THORNHILL. It will never be effected.
BRIGHTLY. I'll bet my Rembrandt against your paddock, which I have long coveted for orchard ground, that it will be effected.

 
THORNHILL. Well then, I take your bet that it will not.
BRIGHTLY. Hush, hush! Here comes one of the parties concerned.
Enter Sir Cameron Kunliffe. SIR CAMERON. Welcome, Brightly; and Thornhill, also, welcome both to this little by-nook of dissipation!    and when you took your route this way, I flatter myself you remembered that you have an old friend in the neighbourhood.
BRIGHTLY. We did so, Kunliffe, and were now proposing to walk to your house. It is, I believe, within two miles of the village.
SIR CAMERON. A short distance, which I hope you will often traverse, on foot or on horseback, as suits your convenience. I saw your groom at the stable door, Thornhill, rubbing down that beautiful brown nag of yours, and he told me you were here.

 
THORNHILL. It is lucky you did; we might have gone to your house else and missed you.
SIR CAMERON. So you might.—Did I not hear you talking of a bet as I entered? You will not be silly enough to bet away that beautiful animal?
THORNHILL. O no! it did not concern the nag.
BRIGHTLY. It neither concerns the nag nor the nag's master; yet it is a bet of some moment too.
SIR CAMERON. No doubt, no doubt; it was foolish in me to think of the paces of a horse, when all the menage of our borough canvassers is approaching, and doubtful enough, I wot, to tempt any better.
THORNHILL. It did not concern the borough neither.
SIR CAMERON.    O! you are close and mysterious, gentlemen.
BRIGHTLY. To give you the pleasure of guessing.
SIR CAMERON. I'faith, you are mistaken in that. What pleasure
 
sure should I have in guessing? No man on earth has less curiosity than myself.
BRIGHTLY. I think I have known some men with less: had you said women, I should have assented more readily.
SIR CAMERON. Fy upon thee! both men and women are nine-pins for thy bowl to roll at.
THORNHILL. And he may have good bowling here, I trow; there be men of many conditions in this by-nook of dissipation, as you call it, and I am sure there is one lady, at least, of so many minds and moods, that she may very well stand for twenty.
SIR CAMERON. Your bet concerns a lady, then?
BRIGHTLY. It would be great unthrift to tell you that, who have no curiosity.
SIR CAMERON. Well, well, and you have told it me, though you are not aware of it.

 
Enter Mrs. Flounce, coming forward very briskly, and then pretending to draw back in confusion. FLOUNCE. O dear!—I beg pardon, gentlemen.—I knew not you were here—I came in search of Master Lawry. My lady is frightened to death about him,—but she does not know that I am come after him to this hotel.—O! she is in such a    quandary; she did not know where to send me after him: for you know, gentlemen, a child may break his bones or come to mischief anywhere.
SIR CAMERON. Nobody will deny that, Mrs. Flounce.
FLOUNCE. O lud, Sir Cameron! are you in this hotel? But you have a fine house in the neighbourhood, as the waiter tells me,—not that I inquired— I enters into no matters as don't belong to me.
SIR CAMERON. If you had inquired, Mrs. Flounce, I should have taken it as a compliment.
BRIGHTLY. And if your lady had desired you to inquire, it would have been taken as a compliment of double value.

 
FLOUNCE. She bid me inquire! how could you think of such a thing, Mr. Brightly, when she expressly forbade me to inquire anything about it?
BRIGHTLY. And you are a woman of discretion, Mrs. Flounce, of very deep discretion. Still keep your lady's counsel as you do now, and you will deserve the best silk gown in her wardrobe.
THORNHILL. And her best garnet brooch into the bargain.
FLOUNCE. Oh, what are silk gowns and brooches to me! Master Lawry! Master Lawry! That child is the plague of our lives. Is he in that there garden? where shall I find him?
BRIGHTLY.    You had better go to the fortune-teller, if there be such a person in the place; he may know about him as well as other stray goods.
FLOUNCE. No, no! I hates fortune-tellers; they have told me so many lies already.—Good morning, gentlemen, I ax your pardon.—I have been very rude; shockingly rude indeed.
                                         Exit, curtseying herself away to the door.
 
SIR CAMERON. But you will both walk to my house as you proposed, and I shall have the pleasure of attending you.
THORNHILL. Have the goodness to wait till we have given some orders about our luggage, and we are at your command.
                                         Exeunt Brightly and Thornhill. SIR CAMERON alone. Did not know that my house is in this neighbourhood. —Pretty innocence!—Has she changed plans again?—Does the wind set fair for a second venture?—I might have known she was here by Franklin being so ready to come to me. That girl, Emma, stands between him and his wits. And these two fellows casting up in this corner so unexpectedly, what may this mean? A bet, forsooth! are they after her, too? But be canvassing or courtship the object, they sha'n't encompass me in their snares.
Re-enter Brightly and Thornhill. BRIGHTLY. Now we are ready to follow you.
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE II. An Apartment in Miss Vane's House. Enter Emma, with a small embroidering frame in her hand, which she puts upon the table, followed by Lawry carrying a work-bag. She then sits down to her work. LAWRY. No, no, sister! no work now! you promised I should have some skeins to hold.
EMMA. And you shall hold them all, Lawry, when they are wanted. Am I to wind them before, only to amuse you, as one throws out a ball for the kitten? I must begin this ranunculus with one or other of these bright colours immediately.
LAWRY. And I know why you are in such a hurry.
EMMA. Dost thou, master conjurer?
LAWRY. Ay, marry do I; for if you don't, Aunt Letty
 
will come to choose the colour for you, and then it won't be begun for a week. O! here she is; I must get out of the way of her errands, and directions, and re-directions, as fast as I can. I'm sure, if I could keep them all in my head, the learning of Greek would be a joke to me.
Enter Latitia catching hold of Lawry as he tries to pass. LATITIA. Where art thou going, urchin? hast thou given my message to the coachman?
LAWRY. No, ma'am, but I'll do it immediately, in the very words you spoke. He must be at the back entry ten minutes before two.
LATITIA. No, not quite so soon. To Emma.  Shall I say half-past two, my dear, or a quarter before three?—Perhaps that may be too late.—Tell    him half-past two, unless he should—
LAWRY. I'll just give him the first message, Auntie, no more.
                                         Breaks from her and exit. LATITIA. Impudent little runagate! that child must be put to school forthwith.

 
Enter a Servant with letters. But here are my letters, and they will relieve me, I trust, from many perplexities.
EMMA. Yes, my dear aunt, if they do not leave as many behind as they carry away.
LATITIA. Peace, child; thou art so thoughtless that nothing is a perplexity to thee. Looks at the letters lying on the table. Ha! here is an answer to my application for the house. Opens a letter and reads.
EMMA. And does the landlord agree to your terms?
LATITIA in a hesitating slow drawl. Ye-s.
EMMA. Then there is one difficulty surmounted.
LATITIA as before. Ye-s, so far surmounted; but I have been thinking further of it. The drawing-rooms are too large, and my dressing-room is too small, and there is no convenient closet for my curiosities and china.

 
EMMA. And will you give it up, after all, just when he agrees to your terms?
LATITIA. Nay, I don't know that. If my own apartment were better, and room for my curiosities,    and if the back staircase were not so miserably narrow, I should not hesitate for a moment.
EMMA. But things are as they are, and cannot be altered; so you must either take the house, with its imperfections, or give it up.
LATITIA. Ay, there it is: he is so unreasonable as to desire an immediate answer. I wish that word immediate were expunged from the vocabulary. If I had time, I could write to Lady Trinkum about it, and likewise Mr. Changet, the best judge of houses in the world; but to commit myself at once—Oh! what is to be done!— What seal is that you are examining so minutely?
EMMA. Two gules reversed on a field azure.
LATITIA eagerly. Ha! from that quarter! at it again
EMMA. Did you not expect a second proposal when
 
your former treaty of marriage broke off because his fortune was deemed insufficient for your fashionable plans of expense?—for, by the unexpected death of his elder brother, some three months ago, that obstacle is removed.
LATITIA snatching the letter from her hand, and reading it eagerly. Thou art quite right, it is a second proposal; and, oh! what shall I do? Traversing the room in a disturbed manner. I shall appear sordid— I shall appear mean—I shall appear mercenary    in his eyes.
EMMA. Not more so than when you declined his first proposal on that ground. You will now appear to him, not very sentimental, indeed, but consistent.
LATITIA. Oh! but I did not ostensibly decline his offer on that ground, though that was the true one.— What shall I do! Suffer him to think meanly of my motives; and give up all my plans too of living a distinguished single woman, in a house of my own,—the patroness of arts, the encourager of genius, the loadstar in society!—You know all this, my dear child,—you know what the wishes of my heart have been.

 
EMMA. Indeed I knew that you spoke about it, but I did not know that you wished for it.
LATITIA. Ah! but I did—I thought I did. Pacing backward and forward in an irresolute way; then stopping short. And now, when this house, this most desirable house, may be had upon my own terms!
EMMA. But you forget, my dear aunt, that it wants a closet for your curiosities, and that the back staircase is so miserably narrow.
LATITIA. Don't distract me, Emma: tell me what to do. How does it strike you? Would it not be better—O, no! that won't do, neither.—O    that Lady Totterdown or Mrs. Siftall were here, that I might ask their advice!—What would you advise me to do?
EMMA. The writer of that letter is not unreasonable enough to require an immediate answer: lay it aside for the present, and open the next. Pointing to another letter.
LATITIA opening it. I am glad she has found time to answer me at
 
last. You must listen to this, Emma; it regards the education of Lawry. Mrs. Overall is a woman of a deeply philosophical mind; and on such an important subject, I was anxious that she should give me her opinion.
EMMA. The thing of all others she is most ready to give. And what is it?
LATITIA reading. “I have been prevented by many avocations from writing”—I sha'n't read the apology, but pass on to the matter in question:—“Education of every kind has, till lately, proceeded upon a wrong principle. Every body taught the same things, without regard to talent or capacity. Should not a boy's instruction be adapted to his genius?”—She is very right there, Emma; you need not smile. There is good reason in what she says.—“If he has a turn for mathematics, would you make him a lawyer? If    forensic eloquence, would you cram him with grammar and Greek? If for poetry, would you confine him to a counting-house? If for painting, would you entangle him in diplomacy? Apply all the force of tuition to his principal,— his leading talent, and you will make a distinguished man of him with little trouble.”
EMMA laughing heartily. And how shall we discover poor Lawry's
 
talent, if playfulness and mischief be not ranked as natural endowments? Pray forgive me, aunt: I am too flippant.
LATITIA. Indeed, I think you are, child: listen to what follows:—“And how fortunate it is for your purpose that Dr. Crany, one of our most celebrated phrenologists, is in ..... at present. Let him examine your nephew's head, and he will tell you at once what course to pursue.” Enter Brightly. Mr. Brightly, I refer to you.
BRIGHTLY. And what is the matter in question?
LATITIA. To educate my nephew according to the bent of his genius. Is not that right?
BRIGHTLY. Assuredly, when you can find it out.
LATITIA. Dr. Crany, the phrenologist, will do that for us.
BRIGHTLY. Very willingly, I doubt not. I forgot what new lights philosophy throws on such mysteries    now-a-days. Yes, by all means let the boy's
 
head be examined. Does this little girl make a jest of it?—Yes, yes, let him be examined, and then you will be no longer undecided on the treatment of your little will o' the wisp?
EMMA. To be sure that would be something gained.
BRIGHTLY. Let us try for it, at least; I'll go to the doctor forthwith.
LATITIA running after him as he is going out. O no, no! not yet: you are too sudden, too hasty, Mr. Brightly. I must have more time to consider of it.
BRIGHTLY. And let the doctor proceed on his tour, and repent when the opportunity is past.
LATITIA. Does he leave the place so soon?
BRIGHTLY. I have heard so: this will be your only opportunity.
LATITIA. Go, then, go!—O how hasty and teasing these opportunities are!

 
EMMA. Indeed, my dear aunt, you generally make them so.
                                         Exit Brightly. Enter a Servant. SERVANT. The carriage is waiting, Ma'am.
LATITIA. Let it wait. It comes before the time.
EMMA. Indeed, Ma'am, your coachman seldom makes that mistake. By my watch he is half an hour after it. Looking at her watch.
LATITIA. Come, come then!—Flounce! Flounce!    calling off the Stage, bring my shawl and bonnet.
                                         Exeunt in a hurry. SCENE III. Court before Latitia's House. Enter Sir Cameron Kunliffe and Mrs. Flounce, speaking as they enter. SIR CAMERON. And Miss Vane is only gone out for a short airing?

 
FLOUNCE. Yes, Sir Cameron; that is to say, if she keeps in the mind as when she set out. I never answers for more than that of any lady.
SIR CAMERON. To be sure, Mrs. Flounce, your prudence is commendable. And since she may probably return so soon, I shall take the liberty of waiting in the parlour.
FLOUNCE. O! not there, Sir, if you please: you had better wait in the harbour yonder; the smell of all them roses and honeysuckles will delight you.
SIR CAMERON. I thank you, Ma'am. I will, by your leave, go into the parlour, and smell the roses another time.
                                         Exit into the house. FLOUNCE. Plague take him for a very moral of perversity! for he'll find Mr. Franklin in the parlour; and how many odd notions may come into his head the cunning one himself would not guess. For, dear me! he has a marvellous gift for making much out of nothing, as his valet at the hall tells me.—He's perversity personified; for if one wants him to turn to the right hand, for that very reason he turns to the left.
                                         Exit.
 
SCENE IV. The Parlour. Enter Sir Cameron, starting back as he enters. SIR CAMERON. Did I not see a man go hastily into that opposite door?—I am not the only person, I apprehend, who is waiting the return of the ladies. And my lady's maid too; she is no novice in her calling.—“O, Sir! had you not better wait in the harbour yonder, and smell to the roses?” Well, well, what is all this to me? I prefer her, I fear, with all her follies, to any other woman; but, thank God! I am still free: I have not committed myself. She is coming: I hear voices in the hall—her own voice.—Why should a voice sound so sweet which so often repeats silly things?
Enter Latitia. LATITIA. Good morning, Sir Cameron. It is very good in you to come so early to see us. How unexpected the pleasure of meeting you here!
SIR CAMERON. To show my bodily presence two miles from
 
my own house is not surely very wonderful, though it may be unexpected. However, I will not mortify my vanity so far as to suppose it both unexpected and unwelcome.
LATITIA. How ridiculously grave you look! How should one know how far your house is from this town?
SIR CAMERON.    I'll answer you that question, if you will tell me in return, how long this place is to have the honour of harbouring so charming a visiter.
LATITIA. How all the world seem leagued to embarrass one with direct queries! My plans are not yet settled, and I don't know how long I may stay. The lease of a house requires some consideration.
SIR CAMERON. And you will not stint it on that point, I know. But the lease of a house puts deeds, and bonds, and contracts of another kind into one's thoughts: I hope you will not dash any presumptuous hope which a poor bachelor like myself may have entertained, by owning a matrimonial plan in connection with the other.
LATITIA. A matrimonial plan! What has a single
 
woman, who has entered into her thirty-second year, to do with matrimonial plans?
SIR CAMERON. When the spirit and bloom of five-and-twenty brighten a lady's countenance, I never think of her age.—Well then, matrimony has nothing to do with it?
LATITIA. No, nothing at all: my house, that is to say, if I do take the lease, will be a cheerful spinster's house, where literati will assemble, amateurs sit in council, curiosities be examined, poems read,    and all the bon-mots of the town be repeated; if I can induce the learned and refined to honour with their society such a humble individual as myself.
SIR CAMERON. What delightful intercourse!—with not one word of scandal required to give it zest.
LATITIA. Not one word.
SIR CAMERON. And this charming arrangement is determined upon?
LATITIA. Absolutely.

 
SIR CAMERON. And woe worth the selfish man who should seek to turn aside your mind from such a refined speculation! He would surely deserve condign punishment.
LATITIA. Nay, that were judging too uncharitably. He might give one an opportunity of proving the strength of one's resolution, without incurring severe censure.
SIR CAMERON. But what if he should prove the weakness of it: would he not then deserve to be called a very selfish fellow?
LATITIA. I will give hard names to nobody: and I must ask your opinion of another affair, if you will have the goodness to favour me with it.—What had I better do in regard to my little idle nephew?    I should like to give him a good education; for, idle as he is, he is clever enough: and I should like to avoid all fallacious and useless modes of tuition. I have been advised to have his head examined by the famous phrenologist who is now in the place; will you do me the favour to be present?
SIR CAMERON. I shall have the honour to obey your summons whenever you please.

 
LATITIA. Your friends, Brightly and Thornhill, have also promised to be present, and here they come, opportunely.
Enter Brightly and Thornhill. BRIGHTLY. Away with you, Kunliffe, if you would not be beset by half a dozen of ladies of ton, who have laid their heads together to oblige you to give them a fête-champêtre in your park. They know that you are here; and I have got the start of them only a few paces.
SIR CAMERON. Thank you! thank you! I hear their voices without; and I would not encounter the clamour of that beldame and her train for the best buck in my park.
Enter three Ladies, as he is about to escape. FIRST LADY. Ho, Sir Cameron! stop the fugitive. Catching hold of his sleeve. You shan't escape till you have heard my speech, as the delegate of all    the fair ladies in ...... Your park, they bid me say, is fairy ground; and they request to be its happy fairies for one day, to dance in its glades, and—and, I forget the rest. O yes! I am enjoined to say—

 
SIR CAMERON. Nay, my good Madam; sweet as the sound of your voice may be in my ears, I will trouble you to say no more; your request is granted.
SECOND LADY. O how delightfully ready!
FIRST LADY. The day and the hour, Sir Cameron?
SIR CAMERON. The day and the hour which this lady pointing to Latitia  will do me the favour to name.
FIRST LADY. No, no! this is but a subterfuge; you must name it yourself.
SIR CAMERON. Pardon me, ladies, pardon me! Miss Vane will fix the time. I am obliged to attend an appointment.—Good morning,—excuse me; good morning.
                                         Hurries away and exit. THIRD LADY. He is laughing at us; I told you it would be so.
FIRST LADY. But we'll follow him: he must not escape so.
                                         Exeunt Ladies.
 
Manent Brightly and Thornhill. BRIGHTLY. It would require more courage than our friend possesses to keep his ground as a bachelor lord of the manor, near a watering place like this. But what think ye of our bet? There is a life    and hilarity in his countenance which assures me your paddock will soon become the orchard-ground of a certain worthy neighbour of yours; I see it very clearly, with all its fruit trees in blossom.
THORNHILL. We are all sanguine enough where our own advantage is concerned: I see your beautiful Rembrandt as clearly on the walls of my library; and all the connoisseurs of the county peeping at it through their fingers. But let us follow the game.
                                         Exeunt. As the last characters disappear, Franklin is seen peeping out from the inner room, and then comes forward. FRANKLIN. The coast is clear at last. O, if I could catch a glimpse of her now! And here she comes, most fortunately, as if she knew I was waiting for her.
 
Enter Emma. Dear Emma! I have been secreted in that closet while Sir Cameron, and your aunt, and a crowd of other visiters have been here in succession, which appeared as if it never would end. Now the hurly burly is over, and I am rewarded for my patience.
EMMA. Ah, George! Why must I chide you for coming?
FRANKLIN. And do you chide me?
EMMA. I ought to do it; you know very well that I    ought.
FRANKLIN. Yes, to come here is foolish: to listen to the sound of your voice; to catch a glimpse of your figure through the shrubs as you play with your brother in the garden; to follow your carriage with mine eyes, and feel its very track on the sand like a talisman or charm to the fancy, is all very foolish, but a folly that is incorrigible.

 
EMMA. We must try, however: consider well that my fortune is very small.
FRANKLIN. I cannot consider this; but I ought to consider that my own is still smaller.
EMMA. And whatever I have, I shall divide with my brother; for he is a posthumous child, and has not one farthing of his own.
FRANKLIN. I should deserve to be a slave in the galleys, could I wish thee to be one jot less generous.
EMMA. With prospects so precarious and so distant, ought we to be often together, or to enter into any engagement?
FRANKLIN. As far as incessant application to my profession can make them less precarious, I will toil; —no, no, I may not call it toil; —the patriarch's servitude for her whom he loved was sweet to him, and seemed but a few days.

 
EMMA.    I dare not enter into engagements.
FRANKLIN. Thou shalt not; I will be engaged and thou shalt be free.
EMMA. That is impossible: we may both change; I cannot injure thee so far.
FRANKLIN. How injure me? I will be the happier all my life for having loved thee, if I could only once know that I had ever been dear to thee: I would not change such happiness to—to—
EMMA. To be made Chancellor of England.
Enter Sir Cameron behind, and observing them in earnest discourse, coughs loud several times to give them notice of his presence, without effect, and then comes forward. SIR CAMERON. How very easy it would be to play the eaves-dropper at this interesting moment, when things
 
might be spoken not unwelcome to a curious ear.—Thou art a happy fellow to engage such unbroken attention from such an auditor.— You are both too grave to answer me. Yet I would have you to know, that I have been made a confidant in affairs of the heart, ere now.
EMMA aside to Franklin . Conceal nothing from Sir Cameron, but permit me to retire.
                                         Exit. SIR CAMERON. She whispered in your ear as she went.
FRANKLIN. “Conceal nothing from Sir Cameron” were the words.”
SIR CAMERON. Gentle, confiding creature! and wilt thou    obey her? thou wilt not. Thou wilt just tell me what is perfectly convenient, and no more.
FRANKLIN. Nay, nay, cousin; you wrong me. I will obey her thoroughly, and I sha'n't tire you with a long story neither.
SIR CAMERON. Well, then, you shall walk home with me, and tell it by the way.

 
FRANKLIN. I have left my hat in the little room. I'll join you immediately.
                                         Exit. SIR CAMERON alone. Kind, simple, confiding creatures! He, too, so frank and open! I love them both: ay, and I will behave nobly to them.
Re-enter Franklin with his hat. FRANKLIN. I must first run to the post-office for a letter I expect to receive; but don't stop for me; I'll join you at the end of the street.
SIR CAMERON. You have no love correspondence in any other quarter, I hope.
FRANKLIN. How can your mind harbour such a thought?
SIR CAMERON. The mind of one who has lived long in the world is often forced to give harbour to many an unwelcome thought.
FRANKLIN. The letter I expect is from no fair lady, but from worthy Mr. Harding.

 
SIR CAMERON. Ha! what have you to do with Mr. Harding?
FRANKLIN. I have had to do with him lately as a solicitor.
SIR CAMERON.    And on some serious business, no doubt.
FRANKLIN. Serious enough for me;—the piecing up of all the rags and remnants of that poor garment, my patrimony, that my shoulders may not be entirely bare, till my own industry shall earn for me another covering.
                                         Exit. SIR CAMERON alone. Harding his solicitor! Ha, ha! I like not this. Can it be only concerning his own little remnants of property!—It may be so; I will not doubt his word.—I hate all unreasonable suspicion.—I shall hear his story, and I shall touch upon the subject of Harding afterwards. I shall watch his looks; and if he really know any thing of the flaw in that bungled deed, I shall find it out.
                                         Exit.
 
ACT II. SCENE I. —The Library in Sir Cameron Kunliffe's House. Enter Master Lawry and the Housekeeper, speaking as they enter. HOUSEKEEPER. And you are come so far from home, Master, to look at a picture-book—the book of ships, eh?
LAWRY. And is that very surprising?
HOUSEKEEPER. To be sure one need not be much surprised; for boys will wander for the very love of wandering; it is all one as though it made a part of their day's work.
LAWRY. Ay, so they will; and now give me the book, and turning over the leaves of it will make another part of my day's work.
HOUSEKEEPER. But are you sure, young Sir, that Sir Cameron gave you leave to look over them books?

 
LAWRY. Why should I tell a lie about it?
HOUSEKEEPER. To be sure it would be letting the devil have too good a bargain.
LAWRY. Yes; lying for a small matter is great unthrift; yet I have heard of a woman, who called herself ten years younger than she was, to make her age a proper match to her rose-coloured top-knot. Looking archly at her head-dress.
HOUSEKEEPER. Say what you please, young master; but if Sir Cameron gave you leave to look at his books when he is absent, it is what he never allowed to any one before.
LAWRY. I did not say he gave me leave to look at    them in his absence.
HOUSEKEEPER. And what if he should return suddenly, and find you turning over his books? that would make a fine rumpus, I trow.
LAWRY. Would he punish me?

 
HOUSEKEEPER. No, Sir, it is me that would be punished; I should lose my place and be ruinated.
LAWRY. Nay, nay! don't be distressed, good Madam: I will take all the blame on myself, and say that I entered in spite of you.
HOUSEKEEPER. That excuse would not pass with him; he would discharge me all the same. Heaven knows what trouble I have to keep my situation here.
LAWRY. Then I'll go directly, and see the pictures another time: don't be so distressed, my good ma'am.
HOUSEKEEPER. Well, thou art a sweet creature after all, and I will run some risk to please thee. Taking a book from the shelves and laying it on the table.
LAWRY. O thank you, thank you; how good you are. Begins to turn over the leaves. What a gallant ship, with her sails set and her colours flying! I wish I were aboard of her.
HOUSEKEEPER. Stop, stop; as I'm a Christian woman, your fingers are all smeared with lollypops.

 
LAWRY.    Then you are no Christian woman, for that is the stain of black cherries, and my hands have been washed since I ate them.
HOUSEKEEPER. Let us make sure of it, however. Takes a handkerchief from her pocket and rubs one of his hands, while with the other he attempts to pull the smart bow from her cap. Mischief to the very core of thee! Yet thou art a sweet creature too; and much pleasure may you have with your book.
                                         Exit by an opposite door.                                          While Lawry is busy with his book, Sir Cameron's voice is heard without, and he starts from the table, puts the book in its place, and looks round in dismay. LAWRY. Where can I hide myself?—Ay, that will do. Climbs upon the back of a library chair which stands close to a bookcase, and pulls down a map from its roller to conceal himself.
Enter Sir Cameron. SIR CAMERON. The air of this day is oppressive; I feel drowsy and tired. Sits down in the chair. This seat is uneasy, the upholsterer has stuffed it very badly. Let me see. Pulls it out from the book-case, and Lawry drops down on the floor. —
 
What have we here!—Hiding in my library! —It is Lawry, by my faith.—Get up, child: I hope thou art not hurt. He does not move! torpid as a dormouse!—Ho, there! is nobody at hand? Ho there! Rings a bell violently. No limbs are broken, I hope.
Enter Servants, and re-enter Housekeeper, all gathering about Lawry. HOUSEKEEPER. A boy in this room, preserve me! how got he here?—Ay, them urchins will scramble and climb, and make their way anywhere like very polecats. He got no entrance here, I'm sure, by the door in a natural way. Dear me, dear me!
SIR CAMERON.    Don't make such a clamour about it: who cares how he entered. Examine whether he be hurt, and I'll despatch a man directly for a surgeon. He must be blooded.
                                         Exit hastily. LAWRY starting up from the floor. He will be a clever surgeon that finds me here.
                                         Exit running. OMNES. Let him go, he's a clever imp,—don't hinder him.

 
Re-enter Sir Cameron. SIR CAMERON. Where is he? have you carried him to bed.
FIRST SERVANT. His own legs have carried him off very nimbly.
SIR CAMERON. Pursue him, and fetch him back.
HOUSEKEEPER. It will be to no purpose, Sir Cameron; and the sooner he gets to his own home the better, for the ladies will be alarmed at his absence.
FIRST SERVANT looking out. He has cleared the lawn already; catch him who can.
SIR CAMERON. Leave me.
                                         Exeunt Servants, all but the Housekeeper. HOUSEKEEPER. I fear you will be thinking, Sir, that I let him in.
SIR CAMERON. Leave me, Mrs. Marmalade.
HOUSEKEEPER. I just want for to say, Sir Cameron—

 
SIR CAMERON. I just want for to be alone.                                          Exit Housekeeper, tossing her head. That boy has come to the house in my absence for some purpose or other.—Their purpose cannot be good who employ such means to effect    it. Looking up to the bookcase. Concealed behind that map, which he must have unrolled to cover him. Ha! to scramble up to that very shelf where the key of my iron box is concealed behind the pamphlets.—By my faith, and they have been disturbed too. Let me see. Standing on the seat of the chair, to examine the upper shelf. The key is gone; devil take the cunning little varlet! he has stolen the key. Pacing about in a disturbed manner. I was surprised to hear that he had transactions with Harding. —I see the whole business now. He knows of the cursed mistake in that testamentary deed.— A base device to get it into his hands for inspection. Advances to the front, and stands thoughtfully with his arms across. Suspicious! had I not been less suspicious than most people, I should have been aware of it before.—O that there were less cause for suspicion in this vile world! Must we pass through it like infants or simpletons to be happy? what is reason given us for but to be a defence and a guard?—It may, indeed, occasionally deceive us. It may, —it may! that, alas, I know too well.—Oh!
 
my remembrance of that cruel hour is intolerable. Had I then been as a simple infant instead    of a reasoning man, how happy I might have been! Beating his forehead. Well, well, well! there is no use in thinking of it now. She is happy with another, and prosperous and happy may she be! Enter Humphries. What dost thou want? Did I ring the bell?
HUMPHRIES. No, your honour; but a servant from Miss Vane is here, and his lady requests you will remember your promise to be present at the examination of Master Lawry's head, and the cranium doctor is to be at her house at four o'clock precisely.
SIR CAMERON. My best respects to the lady, and I shall have the honour of obeying her summons.                                          Exit Humphries. If the organs of mischief and knavery be not discovered under the curly locks of that little imp, the science, as they deem it, of phrenology is a spider's web to catch flies withal.
                                         Exit.
 
SCENE II. An Ante-room. Enter Humphries and a Locksmith, carrying a basket with his tools. HUMPHRIES. You may set down your things here a bit, Mr. Cramp, till Sir Cameron rings his bell.— Plague upon it! to make all this ado about nothing. Plague take the whole tribe of suspectors and inspectors, with all their cautions, and securities, and contrivances!
LOCKSMITH. No, no, Mr. Grumbler! you must not say so to a locksmith. My benison upon the whole tribe.
HUMPHRIES. Yes, truly, thou hast made a pretty penny of it here.
LOCKSMITH. Not much neither: I have not changed a lock in this house these three months.

 
HUMPHRIES. Hast thou forgot the two inner presses in his study, and the escrutoire in his dressing-room?
LOCKSMITH. No, but I hope I shall soon; for one job beats another from my mind.
HUMPHRIES. Ay, thou thinkest but of one thing at a time. I wish my master would do the same; for he is not one jot wiser for mixing up so many notions together, like cloaks hung upon a hall-pin, black, blue, and dirty, every one huddled over another: that he is not, I'm sure.
LOCKSMITH. I wonder such a plain, surly fellow as thou    art should keep thy place in his service so long.
HUMPHRIES. He takes my surliness for honesty.
LOCKSMITH. And he is not one jot wiser for that, I should reckon.
HUMPHRIES. No, Cramp; he is not deceived. But as I am honest, I must be treated like an honest man.
LOCKSMITH. Certainly; that is but reasonable. And how
 
does Mrs. Marmalade contrive to stay here so long? She is neither plain nor surly, I'm sure.
HUMPHRIES. Oh! but she has one great advantage over me.
LOCKSMITH. What is that?
HUMPHRIES. He sees she is a fool; and certes, she is the greatest fool that ever had wit enough to keep account of household linen, and overlook the making of pickles and preserves.
LOCKSMITH. Yes, for certain, she has a great power of words on every occasion, and few of them to the purpose. How has he patience to hear her?
HUMPHRIES. I'll tell you how: whenever he questions her about any mischance in the family, he knows very well that all she tells him, in the first place, is false, but that it will soon be contradicted as she goes on; and that what she tells him last will be within a trifle of the truth. Besides, he is amused with her, and she is related to his old    nurse. For he is really a kind-hearted man, for all his odd notions and vagaries.

 
LOCKSMITH. He is too wise, belike, to think there be any honest folk in the world.
HUMPHRIES. No, no! he thinks there may be a tithe of honest folk in it, but how to find them out,— that is his perplexity. Bell rings. Now, he is ready for you: follow me with your tools, and do what you can for this cursed chest, else there will be no peace in the house for a week.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE III. An Apartment in the House of Latitia. Enter Emma and Dr. Crany, by opposite sides. DR. CRANY. Is it your summons, Madam, I have the honour of obeying?
EMMA. It is my aunt, Sir, who requested this favour of you, and she will be here immediately. Have the goodness to be seated.
DR. CRANY. I prefer the position which allows me most
 
perfectly to contemplate the riches of that beautiful forehead. Advancing towards her, while she retreats. Music—the music of the soul. Colours—design—comprehensiveness! O! what a rich mine of charming capacity! Pray, permit— putting out his hand to raise the hair from her forehead, as she has got to the wall, and can retreat no farther.
EMMA preventing him. Have the goodness, Sir, to stand farther off: it is not my head that my aunt wishes you to examine.
Enter Latitia, followed by Brightly and Thornhill. LATITIA. I am infinitely obliged to you, Doctor; but pray take no trouble with the head of this young lady, for her education is finished.
DR. CRANY. Is education ever finished, my good Madam, while one capacity remains unexplored and uncultivated? Our science is still in its infancy, and therefore the world is still in its infancy; talents wasted—time wasted—tuition wasted —reason wasted.

 
BRIGHTLY aside.    Ay, there will be a great saving of reason when it comes into use.
THORNHILL. It is a supposed science, Sir, in which yourself and some other distinguished philosophers place much confidence.
DR. CRANY. A supposed science, Sir! it is a proved one. Proved by a successive inspection of the skulls of distinguished men, from remote antiquity down to the present day.
THORNHILL. And how have you procured them?
DR. CRANY. We have procured them, Sir, with much labour and very great expense.
BRIGHTLY. You are very liberal, I dare say, to any person who puts you in possession of a skull that confirms the rules of your science.
DR. CRANY. Certainly, Sir; his reward is great, and deservedly so.
THORNHILL. Yes, Doctor, permission to open the coffins of
 
the celebrated dead could not be easily obtained; the reward must be in proportion.
BRIGHTLY. And to him who should put you in possession of a skull apparently adverse to your science, what would be his remuneration?
DR. CRANY. The same, Sir; when we are assured of the skull being genuine, we make no difference.    But—which proves the truth of the science— we have very, very seldom indeed, such a skull offered to us.
BRIGHTLY. An indubitable proof, indeed, Dr. Crany; I beg your pardon for having insinuated the slightest doubt. And, as you say, what a saving of time and of reason there will be, when, instead of inquiring the past actions and propensities of a man, you have only to run over his head with your fingers, and become acquainted with his character at once.
DR. CRANY. Exactly so; and with the ladies' permission I will tell an anecdote to illustrate the fact.
LATITIA. Pray do, Doctor; we are all fond of anecdotes.

 
DR. CRANY. A man was tried for murder at the Bury assizes; the evidence was deficient, and the jury retired to deliberate. But a clever phrenologist, having crept to the bar and peeped at the prisoner's head, whose hair happened to be cut very close, descried the organs of destruction of such an appalling size as left no hesitation on the subject, and he could scarcely repress an exclamation, when the door of the jury-box opened, and the foreman pronounced the prisoner not guilty.
THORNHILL.    They decided according to the evidence.
DR. CRANY. Yes, Sir; and till the laws of evidence are reformed, they cannot do otherwise.  Latitia whispers to Emma, who retires. But my story is not yet finished. Six months afterwards the prisoner committed another murder, for which he was convicted and hanged. Now, had he been hanged for the first offence, he could not have committed the second.
BRIGHTLY. He must be very contentious, indeed, Doctor, who does not admit that.
                                         Re-enter Emma, lugging in Lawry, and followed by Sir Cameron. 
 
EMMA. Come, come, Lawry, make no more wry faces, but kneel down here, and let that gentleman examine your head.
LAWRY. My head! he will not flog that end of me.
                                         The Doctor sits down, and Lawry kneels. DR. CRANY feeling his head. The organs of excursiveness: this young gentleman plays truant pretty often.
LATITIA. O, what a true discovery! he 's always running about. Proceed, proceed, if you please.
DR. CRANY. There is great paucity here in the organs of attention, and those of application seem to be wanting entirely.
LATITIA. O dear! how true it is! Your art discovers his nature at once. Pray proceed; something else may be discovered that will teach us how    to manage him.
SIR CAMERON. Keep him at home without his dinner till he has learnt his lesson, and he will do well enough.

 
LATITIA. Nay, you are rather too harsh, Sir Cameron.
EMMA. But see, the Doctor has discovered something better now, for his whole countenance is enlightened.
DR. CRANY. Rejoice, rejoice with me, ladies! the greatest philosopher in England is at my feet.
OMNES. What is it! What is it?
DR. CRANY. The organs of mathematics, superb, surprising, superlative. Starting from his seat and skipping about in ecstasy. Such an organ never yet rose proudly under the pressure of this thumb. Have you not frequently seen him tracing figures on a slate—circles, triangles, and such like?
EMMA. Often enough, Doctor; but the figure he commonly traces is more like a rickety boat with a flag to it than a triangle.
LATITIA. Kneel again, Lawry; the Doctor may discover something more.
DR. CRANY. No, I have done; I know him perfectly now.
 
Keep him at home, and get a mathematical tutor for him immediately.
SIR CAMERON. Yes, Doctor, excellent advice: keep the runagate at home, and keep him close to his figures    and his books.
LAWRY crying. Keep me to my books! I'll run off with the first band of gypsies that lights a fire on the common. What is all that examining for? You might have known very well that if I would stick to my books I should read, without all this pother.
DR. CRANY. But you shall have books so suited to your nature, my boy, that you will delight to stay at home and read them.
LAWRY. Wait till you find such books then; and I'll stay at home when I like it.
                                         Exit, whimpering and muttering. DR. CRANY. Shall I have the honour to examine the other heads in this good company. To Latitia, in a very ingratiating tone. Madam,I know that all I shall discover here pointing to her head must be amiable.

 
LATITIA. Excuse me, Doctor, I have not courage.
DR. CRANY turning to Sir Cameron . There is no lack of courage here, I presume. Allow me, Sir, to have the honour. What a promising forehead! those brows, and that fine spreading of the bone!
LATITIA. Do, Sir Cameron; pray be examined; you will oblige me so much.
DR. CRANY aside. O! it is Sir Cameron Kunliffe, I find.
BRIGHTLY AND THORNHILL speaking at the same time. Do, Kunliffe; you cannot refuse a lady's request.
LATITIA placing a chair.    Sit down here, and the Doctor will bend over you.
SIR CAMERON sitting down. If it must be so, I must ev'n submit.
DR. CRANY as he examines his head. Contemplative—very contemplative; likes books better than hunting.
LATITIA. How true!

 
BRIGHTLY. Bravo, Doctor!
THORNHILL. No wizard could have guessed better.
DR. CRANY. And here are organs that have been well developed; the—the—
SIR CAMERON. Don't hesitate, Doctor;name it, I beg.
DR. CRANY. The organ of inspection.
BRIGHTLY. Bravo again, Doctor! you have a very good name for it; and if there be such a thing as the organ of suspicion, whereabout does it lie? for I should think the two are pretty near neighbours.
DR. CRANY. They are; but except when much developed, we do not call the last by that name; we call it suspectiveness.
BRIGHTLY. Ha, ha, ha! what nice distinctions! And, I suppose, the organ of deceptiveness does not lie far off from either.

 
DR. CRANY. Excuse me, Sir, as an active quality it stands far apart; if you mean by it a passive one, we have nothing to do with it.
THORNHILL.    Doctor, you have answered him well.
SIR CAMERON. But, my good friends, I must have the organ of patience, also, if I am to sit here till you have asked all your fanciful questions. Don't mind them, Dr. Crany, but go on your own way.
                                          Dr. Crany, after looking at the back of his head, shrinks from it, and covers his eyes with his hand. LATITIA. What is the matter, Doctor? Good heavens! what is the matter?
DR. CRANY. Don't inquire, Madam; in the prosecution of our science, we are subject to painful revulsions. May I beg a glass of water?
THORNHILL having brought him a glass of water, which he drinks in a languid, affected manner. I hope you are better now, and will proceed with what is so very interesting.

 
DR. CRANY. Excuse me, ladies and gentlemen, I examine no more to-day.
SIR CAMERON rising quickly. We had better take our leave, and your heads to Brightly and Thornhill  may wait for some future occasion. Bows to the Ladies, and speaks aside to Brightly and Thornhill, as he goes off. It is only a feint to get rid of your questions.
                                         Exit, followed by Brightly and Thornhill. LATITIA. Good heavens! Dr. Crany, do not keep me in this agony: what have you discovered on the head of Sir Cameron?
DR. CRANY. Do not inquire, Madam, unless you have some very particular reason for it.—He is not a man to be exasperated.—He is not a man to be    trifled with.—He is not a man to be conciliated.
LATITIA. Is he so dangerous?
DR. CRANY looking about. Is there no one near us to listen?

 
LATITIA. No one; tell us, for heaven's sake: is he mad? is he dangerous?
DR. CRANY. It is fearful to think what he is. He has the organ of destruction on his head so strong.— Oh! half a dozen bloody murders would not exhaust that fearful capacity of mischief. I fear I distress you, ladies, but my duty compels me to it. Be secret, be secret. I dare not remain here; I will go to my lodgings and try to recover from this very sudden shock.
                                         Exit. LATITIA. Dear Emma, what do you think of this? it is terrible.
EMMA. If it be true.
LATITIA. Do you doubt it? You saw how unwilling he was to speak, and the distress he was in.
EMMA. If the distress was real, he will fly from the vicinity of a man so dangerous.
LATITIA. Yes, we may judge by that; let us be secret, and see the result. I must retire to my chamber; give me your arm.
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE IV. A Garden. Enter Sir Cameron Kunliffe, and walks backward and forward for some time, muttering, before he speaks audibly. SIR CAMERON. It will not do; they must try some other device before they get this into their custody. To make me their confidant with such seeming simple honesty, and attempt such a trick after all! I shall be less easily deceived another time.
Enter Franklin. FRANKLIN. Walking quarter-deck in this gloomy nook! I have been seeking you every where, all over the grounds.
SIR CAMERON. And having found me, Sir, what is your pleasure with me?
FRANKLIN. How is this, Sir Cameron? You seem offended with me.

 
SIR CAMERON. Why do you suppose that I am offended?
FRANKLIN. Your looks tell me so; I would gladly interpret them otherwise.
SIR CAMERON. And you have learned to watch and interpret looks, it seems: you are too young a man for this.
FRANKLIN. Why, a dog or an infant will do as much.
SIR CAMERON. Fidelity and affection may do any thing.
FRANKLIN. If I am destitute of those qualities, I have harboured too long under your roof. A sullen pause on the part of Sir Cameron.  Farewell,    cousin: I shall visit Miss Vane and her niece once more, and then return to town.
SIR CAMERON calling after him as he is going off. Hark ye, cousin! you will see Mr. Harding, no doubt, when you are in town; pray give my respects to him—my very profound respects.                                          Exit Franklin. O, that he had remained as I once knew him! I should have loved him, I should have taken him to my heart.—Vain wish! the world is a school
 
of perversion. Walks to and fro again, and then stops. Money, thou art truly styled the root of all evil. I should soon, of my own accord, have declared the blunder of that stupid attorney, and should have behaved liberally and nobly. But now, what can I do? It were silliness —it were cowardice to concede. No; I will carry the suit through every court in England first, and live on a crust after all, if lawyers will leave me as much.
Enter Thornhill. THORNHILL. You intended to ride this morning, but I am sorry I cannot accompany you. I have made an engagement with Miss Vane to try the newly discovered organ of her nephew, and will give him his first lesson of mathematics forthwith.
SIR CAMERON. Ha! put by his aunt under your tuition?
THORNHILL. Why should this surprise you? it is only an    experiment.
SIR CAMERON. True, true; we are all, now-a-days, busy with experiments: we shall find out, by and by, some new way of giving brains to a dunce, dexterity to awkwardness, boldness to timidity, ay, and stability to the wavering of a fair lady's will. Faith
 
and truth! governing and law-making will only be matters of experiment. Make verses on the subject, man, and publish them; that will be another experiment.
THORNHILL. Nay, how far rhyme without reason will succeed, is no new experiment.
SIR CAMERON. But there will be reason in it, if thou dost not mar it with thy rhyme.
Enter Brightly. THORNHILL. Welcome, Brightly; you will help me to deal with this moody man here. Have you any news to tell that may amuse us?
BRIGHTLY. To be sure I have. The learned phrenologist has suddenly disappeared from his lodgings; and Miss Vane and her niece are preparing to set off for town.
SIR CAMERON. Who told you this? It cannot be true: the last part of the story cannot be true.
BRIGHTLY. Yet that is just the part of it that I am most
 
assured of; for they are preparing the imperial    of her carriage, and horses have been ordered from the inn. If you would have her remain, Kunliffe, you had better go speedily to wish her good-bye.
SIR CAMERON. Wish her to the devil!
BRIGHTLY. Wishes are free to every one; but even that wish may be expressed in a civil manner. —Come away with me, Thornhill: the moody man will deal best with himself; and I have some curiosity to see that urchin get his lesson of lines and triangles beore they go; for many half hours and half minds may pass away ere his fair aunt is actually in her carriage.
                                         Exeunt Brightly and Thornhill. SIR CAMERON alone. Preparing to depart!—No notice given!— The phrenologist too disappeared! Yes, yes; there is some compact in all this.—His sudden illness too, and all those affected grimaces.— Can he have persuaded her, that some terrible propensities are revealed on the surface of my pericranium; and can she be such a fool as to believe him?—Ay, ay; a rich heiress has fallen into the hands of a cunning knave by a weaker device ere now.—I must not linger here: I'll
 
get to the bottom of this villainy before I rest.— O, this world of knaves and fools! why was my    lot cast in it?—But, being so cast, shall I become quietly the prey of cunning and deceit? May I not use similar weapons in self-defence?— No, no! let her go: fortune was not my object; and if she is fool enough to believe him, she is worthy of such a mate.—Yet it makes me distracted. Oh, this perversity of mind! She is fickle, she is foolish, she is fanciful, she is capricious, and her very faults endear her to my unaccountable feelings.—He shall not have her.—His filthy fingers sprawling over my head for such a villainous purpose: it is abominable. —If deceit will not serve me, force shall. Enter Housekeeper, with a bundle in her hand. What brings you here, Marmalade?
HOUSEKEEPER. La, Sir! nothing bad, I'm sure. If she waits at the back garden gate, it is for no bad purpose, I'm sure.
SIR CAMERON. Who waits there? Tell me plainly, and in few words.
HOUSEKEEPER. Lord a' mercy! why should I make many words about it? She has done it very badly,
 
and I don't care who knows what a miserable mantua-maker she is.
SIR CAMERON. Mantua-maker! What does all this nonsense mean?
HOUSEKEEPER.    It is nonsense, for sartain; and I says to her, says I, “What does it signify making the gown too long, only for to save the cutting of the stuff, when I cannot take one step before me, without trampling it in the dirt?”
SIR CAMERON. Is the gown here?
HOUSEKEEPER. Yes, Sir Cameron; and she is waiting at the back gate to take it to be altered.
SIR CAMERON. Ha! let me see it.
HOUSEKEEPER taking a gown from the bundle. I hope you like the colour, Sir: it is gay, but genteel. I never buys nothing that is vulgar.
SIR CAMERON. Why should you, Marmalade? People only buy what they want.—And it is too long for you?

 
HOUSEKEEPER shaking it out. A mort too long. The giantess that beats the drum at Middleton fair might wear it and be fitted.
SIR CAMERON. Give it to me.
HOUSEKEEPER. To you, Sir Cameron!
SIR CAMERON. Ask no questions. The gown is mine: carry it back to your own room, and I'll follow you immediately. Exit Housekeeper. Yes, this will do; she will provide me with shawl and bonnet besides, and I'll be a match for this cursed philosopher.
                                         Exit. SCENE V. A Parlour in the House of Latitia, and the Glass Door of a small Conservatory seen at one side, with a Curtain drawn behind it. Enter Flounce, who goes to the door, which she opens in silence, giving a key to somebody in the inside. FLOUNCE alone. It was well I found the coast clear, and have
 
given him the key: he may now keep concealed, or come out as he pleases.
Enter Latitia. LATITIA. What wert thou doing in the conservatory? Hast thou left any odd matters there?—But I have changed my mind again, and sha'n't set off till the evening; so you need not be in a hurry.
FLOUNCE. I never am, Ma'am; for the more I hurry myself to obey your directions, the surer it always proves to be of no use.
LATITIA. Thou art rather sharp, methinks: something has ruffled thee. What strange awkward rantipole was that I saw thee speaking to a few minutes since in the lane?
FLOUNCE. She did not tell me her name, Ma'am; and I had too little curiosity to ask it. I never speaks when there is no reason for it.
LATITIA. A good rule, Flounce, which thou observest, with some exceptions. Looking off the Stage. But look yonder,—a man coming in a strange
 
stealing manner along the passage: what brings him here?
FLOUNCE turning round and looking. No good, I'm sure; for it is Doctor Crany: I know him by his legs.
Enter Dr. Crany, with his shoulders wrapt in a cloak, and holding his hat before his face. LATITIA.    Is it possible, my good Sir? I thought you were ere now many miles hence,—that you considered your life as in danger.
DR. CRANY. I will account for my being here; but to your ears alone can I explain it.
LATITIA after motioning to Flounce, who goes off. And now, Sir, if you please.
DR. CRANY. That I considered my life in danger is true. Ay, too truly in danger from the offence I must have given to a man with such destructive propensities.
LATITIA. And why did you venture nevertheless to remain?

 
DR. CRANY. Ah, dearest Miss Vane! can you ask that question? do not my eyes—my fond languishing eyes answer it plainly, and tell you that I could not think of saving my own life when the safety of one whom I love far better than myself is concerned.
LATITIA. You astonish me.
DR. CRANY. Let me entreat you to remain no longer in the neighbourhood of such a dangerous person. I tremble to think of it.
LATITIA. What can I do?
DR. CRANY. Fly with me this very night. Fly with a man who loves, who adores you, whose whole life    shall be devoted to your happiness. Kneels at her feet.
LATITIA recoiling from him indignantly. Off, base deceiver! you have betrayed yourself; and thank Heaven you have! I see your purpose now: you have slandered a worthy gentleman for your own selfish ends.

 
DR. CRANY. Slandered, Madam! do you believe that the organs of murder are not really on his head?
LATITIA. No, Sir; neither that nor any bad thing do I believe of him.
DR. CRANY. Have patience for a moment: I cannot suffer you to run upon your own destruction. I implore —I beseech you for your own safety! my chaise is at the gate: if the present opportunity is neglected— Catching hold of her gown.
LATITIA. Unhand me; let me go, or I will alarm the house, and bring some one to my assistance.
                                          Sir Cameron Kunliffe, bursting from the conservatory in woman's dress, shows himself, but hesitates to advance. LATITIA. O come, come, good Madam, come nearer.
DR. CRANY turning round and perceiving Sir Cameron . Good Madam! and what is your pleasure here, good Madam?
SIR CAMERON in a feigned voice. My pleasure is that you release that lady's hand from your unworthy hold: touch but the
 
tip of her finger or the hem of her garment, if you dare; I will not permit the smallest breach of decorum in my presence.
DR. CRANY. You are a lady of an extreme delicacy, undoubtedly.
SIR CAMERON.    Yes, Sir, of a delicacy which must not be offended.
DR. CRANY. I plainly perceive, Madam, that yours is entirely of that description. I have the honour to obey your commands. Stepping backward and bowing low.
SIR CAMERON advancing on him with a deep, awkward curtsey. You are extremely polite, Sir; I have the honour to thank you for your ready obedience.
DR. CRANY stepping farther back and bowing as before. My obedience to you, Madam, expresses my deference to the sex of whom you are the worthy representative.
SIR CAMERON advancing as the other retreats, and curtseying again. Say rather, that part of the sex to whom
 
gallants like yourself pay their readiest obedience.
DR. CRANY still retreating. As you please, Madam, and I wish you good day.
SIR CAMERON. No, no, Sir, your company is too agreeable; I will not part with it so soon.
                                         Taking hold of his collar, and dragging him back to the front of the Stage. DR. CRANY. Devil take her! she has the grasp and the power of a moss-trooper.
Enter Brightly. BRIGHTLY. What uncouth sight is here; is there masquerading in the house?
LATITIA. Indeed, there is some appearance of it. This lady has come unexpectedly, and has done me unspeakable service; for which I know not how to thank her enough.
BRIGHTLY. But she steals away and avoids your acknowledgments.

 
LATITIA.    My good Madam, you will not leave me so soon.
SIR CAMERON. Permit me to go out to the open air; I am faint and languid.
BRIGHTLY. You had better put off your head-gear; that large bonnet, with so much hooding and muffling under it, would exclude the free air from your face, though you were on the top of Mount Ararat. Permit me to assist in removing it.  Sir Cameron puts out his hand to prevent Brightly, and says something indistinctly. You speak with such a soft, pretty voice, lady, that I don't know one word you say.
LATITIA aside to Brightly . She is observant of forms, and will not have a gentleman's assistance. Aloud to Sir Cameron.  Let me take off your bonnet, if I can reach it.  Sir Cameron stoops, and she removes the bonnet. And this handkerchief, too takes off a handkerchief , and a great cap besides. What's under all this!
SIR CAMERON calling out in his own voice after Dr. Crany, who is about to steal away. Look to Dr. Crany there, don't let him steal off.

 
OMNES. Sir Cameron,—Sir Cameron disguised!
BRIGHTLY to Sir Cameron . How had you patience to endure all these trammels?
SIR CAMERON.    I have been too fortunate under them to feel impatient, but help me, an thou wilt, to get rid of them now. Putting off his female attire, assisted by Brightly.  But where is the doctor? don't let him steal off.
DR. CRANY advancing. No, Sir; you need have no apprehension that I shall steal off, as you are pleased to term it. I am too bold in my conscious innocence, and in the principles of an incomparable science, to shrink from defending both. Have I not already given proofs of its truth and usefulness in the discovery I have made of the talents of that unmanageable boy?—who may now be cultivated, from a mere vacant idler, into one of the deepest philosophers of the age.
Enter Thornhill. BRIGHTLY. Here comes his tutor, very opportunely, to corroborate your assertions, Dr. Crany. To
 
Thornhill.  And pray what report have you to make of the wonderful capacity of your pupil?
THORNHILL. I have little to say on that subject.
                                         A book is thrown after him from without. BRIGHTLY. And even that little need not be said. Picking up the book. This dishonoured Euclid tells the tale plainly enough.
Enter Lawry chased by Flounce . FLOUNCE. Come away to your room, Master Lawry: O fy, fy! I beg pardon, Madam, for coming after    him, but he gets worser and worser than ever, since that heathenish book there was put into his hands.
DR. CRANY. I cannot suffer this defamation. Come here, young Sir, and I will show the organs of mathematics on your head of a most prominent and promising size. To Flounce.  Pray make him stand still one moment, if you please.  Flounce takes hold of Lawry, while the Doctor parts his hair with his fingers, and shews a lump. There, gentlemen, you see it with your own eyes; a more superb organ never met the sight or the touch of a phrenologist.

 
FLOUNCE. Lord help you, doctor! that is the lump that came but the other day, after a blow from the bat-ball: two pennyworth of the oil of rosemary would send it away in no time at all.
DR. CRANY. Well, well; there is no contending with prejudice, and the sooner I take my leave the better;—if I am not to be considered as under constraint. Bowing affectedly to Sir Cameron. 
SIR CAMERON. You have my good leave now, learned Sir, to go where you please.
BRIGHTLY to Dr. Crany as he retires. But won't you wait for a guard of protection, good Doctor, being in the neighbourhood of so tremendous an enemy?
                                         Exit Dr. Crany, bowing on either hand as he retires. LATITIA.    Nay, Mr. Brightly, let him off peaceably with no more taunts: I believe he has great faith in his art, though he abuses it for his own base purposes. I thank you all: to you, Mr. Thornhill, I am greatly obliged. And what shall I do now with this unruly boy? Why was I left guardian to such a creature?

 
LAWRY. Never trouble your head about me, aunt; I can handle a rope and climb to the mast-head, and look over a hundred leagues of ocean, and visit far-off shores, as well as any boy.
LATITIA kissing him. My dear creature, my dear boy! that were a hard life for thee; thou art too good for this.
LAWRY. Not a whit, not a whit! Am I too good for what Lord Nelson has done before me?
                                         Exit skipping and bounding lightly. LATITIA. And now, credulous dupe as I have been, will you pardon me, Sir Cameron?
BRIGHTLY preventing Sir Cameron from speaking. Allow me to answer for you, Kunliffe, or you will mar your present advantage. To Miss Vane.  You cannot surely expect, my dear lady, to be let off with impunity. Say your own self what amends he ought to have: pronounce your own punishment, and it shall be immediately inflicted.
LATITIA. How provoking you are, Mr. Brightly! how
 
   can I pronounce or think of any thing immediately? Do you determine it.
BRIGHTLY. You give me leave to do so, on the spot, then?
LATITIA. O no, no! not immediately.
BRIGHTLY. I beg pardon, Madam, immediately is a position you dislike: I shall take time to consider; and, at your tea-table, in the evening, it shall be pronounced.
SIR CAMERON. Round which, I presume, we are all invited to assemble.
LATITIA. Most assuredly; I request all present to do me that honour. Excuse me now; I must retire: the thoughts of my own folly make me quite bewildered and unwell.
                                         Exit. BRIGHTLY. She must have a bad time of it, I think, if she sicken on every new proof of her folly. Half aside to Thornhill .
SIR CAMERON overhearing and turning to him sharply. The caustic of thy tongue is intolerable: her
 
worst fault is indecision; and if she were wiser than she is, who would like her the better for it?
BRIGHTLY. Not you, I can plainly perceive. Aside to Thornhill, as Sir Cameron hurries off. Those words augur well, methinks, for my paddock.
THORNHILL. Don't bespeak your fruit trees, however, till you have won it. But let us follow him and learn all that happened while he was under that    absurd metamorphosis.
BRIGHTLY. Ay, let us do so; I have a great curiosity to know every thing about it. Who would have thought of his dignity compromised under a mantua and petticoat?
                                         Exeunt after Sir Cameron.
 
ACT III. SCENE I. —A small Parlour in the House of Latitia; enter Emma, and walks about thoughtfully; presently enter Franklin by another door. FRANKLIN. How fortunate I am to find you here!
EMMA. How so? you seem agitated.
FRANKLIN. I have been sculking about the premises for a chance of your coming into the garden, that I might see you before I set off.
EMMA. Set off! where are you going?
FRANKLIN. Anywhere, for I cannot stay longer here.
EMMA. What is the matter? Cannot stay?
FRANKLIN. I cannot stay a moment longer in Sir Cameron's house, and I don't like to go to another,
 
which might give him pain. He has got a strange crotchet into his head about some key or other, and I don't know what besides, and he has spoken to me very unkindly.
EMMA. I am sorry for it. But it will soon pass away. Those who are naturally suspicious are often unkind, and repent it afterwards.
FRANKLIN. And why should I linger here, only to strengthen what is but too strong already—an adversary, which for your sake, dearest Emma, as well as my own, ought to be kept in check. Blessings on you, my sweet and generous friend! Only say that I may again visit you when you come to town with your aunt, and I will take    my leave as cheerly as I may.
EMMA. Surely you won't go now, when we are all assembling round my aunt's tea-table, on matters of great importance, and you are one of the invited, you know. Be as testy with Sir Cameron as you please, but surely she deserves more courtesy at your hands.
FRANKLIN. And shall have it too, if it be a courtesy which she will be pleased with, and her little niece does not forbid. I think I hear them assembling;
 
they are merry without.—Poh, poh! I care not a fig for Sir Cameron.
EMMA. You will join us by and by; I must go now to be useful.
FRANKLIN. And I'll be useful too. I'll pour out the tea for you, Emma. That little delicate hand has not strength enough to lift a heavy teapot over all the circle of cups and saucers that wait for the fragrant stream from its bountiful spout. Care for Sir Cameron! No; I care for nobody now.
EMMA. You will join us by and by, then?
FRANKLIN. Nay, I will go with you now, and lead you in boldly before them all. Offering his arm.
EMMA. You are bold, of a sudden.
FRANKLIN.    I am bold or timid at any time, as the influence of my little governess inspires.
                                         Exeunt, and as they go off, Flounce enters by the opposite side with a great nosegay of flowers in her hand, and stands gazing after them, before she speaks.
 
FLOUNCE. Ay, poor young things! you must have patience: matrimony is a very pretty thing, but it will not knock at your door at this bout.
Enter Butler, stealing behind her. BUTLER. And at whose door will it knock at this bout?
FLOUNCE. What is that to you, Mr. Long-ears; you may guess.
BUTLER. One, mayhap, at whose door it will not have to wait: ready entrance to the long expected may be depended upon.
FLOUNCE. Long expected?
BUTLER. Yes; and how long, Mrs. Flounce? Some ten or fifteen years, or thereabouts?
FLOUNCE. Say fifteen, an you will; what is that to my mistress?
BUTLER. O, it is your mistress you are thinking of.

 
FLOUNCE. And who was it you were thinking of, I should be glad to know?
BUTLER. Not so very glad, neither, were I to answer “of the mistress's maid.”—Well, well; don't look so grave. It is your mistress's door, then, that matrimony is now knocking at; but why should you be so pert upon it?
FLOUNCE. I am forgetting my flowers.
BUTLER.    I'll arrange them for you, and carry them to the drawing-room presently. In the mean time, tell me why you are so pert upon this marriage; it won't mend the profits of your place. Taking the nosegay from her, and arranging them in a pot on a side-table while she speaks.
FLOUNCE. No; but it may prevent my profits from being reduced. If she would remain as she is, with her lovers, and her confidants, and her flatterers, and her concerts, and her parties, and all proper suitable things that a rich lady ought to have, I should ask no better; but if she takes it into her head that a lady of thirty should give up gay dressing, and apply to her learning, and become a book-fancier, and a blue-stocking virtuoso,
 
what's to become of my perquisites? It would make your hair stand on end, to hear all the nonsense I have heard about them there books.
BUTLER. My hair makes no stirring at all when nonsense is spoken. It would have a restless time of it else in this family; so pray tell me.
FLOUNCE. And, will you believe it—whole shelves filled with great vollums; and some of them—fiend take them!—with as much silk, gold, and vellum on their backs as would buy a gentlewoman a good gown.
BUTLER. That will take nothing away from you, will it?
FLOUNCE.    The man's an ass altogether!—If my lady gives twelve guineas for the binding of an album, as they call it, and hundreds for prints, and old stones, and rubbish, and rattletraps beside, what good will that do to me? when, I dare say, she'll scrub off her wardrobe, and go about at last, as my Lady Blackletter does, in a gown that our curate's wife would scarcely put on when she goes visiting amongst all the poor sickly bodies of the parish. I knows very well how it would be; so I hope marriage is now really at hand, to save us from worse.

 
BUTLER. I hope so, too, Mrs. Flounce; for I fear the fine books might injure the cellar as well as the wardrobe.
FLOUNCE. O never fear that; she would have poets and ancient philosophers coming about her in plenty, and they like a good dinner and good wine as well as any body; much better than lovers do, I trow. But we must gossip no longer here; you have set out the flowers beautifully; so take them to the drawing-room directly.
                                         Exeunt severally, Butler carrying the flowers. SCENE II. A narrow Passage running along the front of the Stage. Enter Footman and a Boy, crossing and jostling one another. FOOTMAN. Stupid oaf! what makes you run so?
BOY. The gentlefolks want more bread and butter.

 
FOOTMAN. Deuce choke them! is all that was provided for them done already? and Master Lawry gone to bed too. I hope they want nothing else?
BOY. Oh, but they do! they wants more cream and more cups and saucers.
FOOTMAN. The devil they do! they will never have done wanting. Bell rings. And they are as impatient as the Grand Turk: make haste, you oaf.
                                         Giving Boy a kick as they hurry off and exeunt. SCENE III. The Scene opens, and discovers Sir Cameron Kunliffe, Brightly, Thornhill, Latitia, Emma, and Franklin beside her, occasionally employed in pouring out tea, &c., seated round a Table, while laughing and talking is heard as the Scene opens. SIR CAMERON. Ha, ha, ha! and all that passes upon you, my good Thornhill, for disinterested generosity.
THORNHILL. And what should it pass for?

 
SIR CAMERON. Some expectation of a legacy, perhaps, from that old Lady Bountiful of the neighbourhood, who would like to enrich such an amiable philanthropist.
THORNHILL. But that old lady was dead, Kunliffe.
SIR CAMERON. O what a loss to the topers at the Cat and Bagpipes! for they will now be obliged to support their own families and drink less.
EMMA. Don't be so hard-hearted, Sir Cameron.
BRIGHTLY. You must make some allowance for one who holds a justice-court every Friday, and has all the misdoings of the parish brought before him.
THORNHILL. Where, thanks to his natural gift of suspectiveness, he detects as much knavery, and dispenses as prompt justice, as the sage governor of Barataria.
EMMA. And there is a droll look on his face at this moment, as if some curious case had been lately before him.

 
LATITIA. Is it so, Sir Cameron? Do tell us about it.
SIR CAMERON. As it proves the ingenuity of your sex and the simplicity of ours, you shall have it. A country    girl appeared in court the other day, who would oblige the booby son of a small farmer to marry her, because, on his account, she had refused the addresses of a very advantageous match.
EMMA. And how did she prove that?
SIR CAMERON. By calling upon the booby to declare that he had listened at the window of an old malt-house, and heard the shrill voice of his mistress in earnest discourse within with a gruff-voiced man, whose offers of marriage she refused very saucily, on account of her attachment to himself, poor simpleton.
BRIGHTLY. And whether do you call him simpleton, for believing his own ears, or for giving evidence against himself?
SIR CAMERON. For the first, assuredly. What one believes as a fool, one is bound to declare as an honest man. And he would have smarted for his honesty, too,
 
had it not been for the accidental intrusion of a plough-boy, who at the moment slipt softly into the said malt-house, and discovered, that though two voices had issued from the house, there was but one person within.
BRIGHTLY. Clever hussy! she deserved a husband for the trick.
SIR CAMERON,    And she should have had one suited to her merits, could I have transferred to her a smart-looking fellow, who had eloped with the prettiest girl in the parish, on the evening of her wedding-day, just to take her out of his friend the bridegroom's hands, as he gallantly stated it.
LATITIA. I think he was mated very suitably with the woman he eloped with. The bridegroom was well quit of her; she was not worth contending for.
SIR CAMERON. Yes; but it was not for her they contended. No, truly; the matter to be decided was, whether the man who had lost the bride, or the man who had got her, should pay the expenses of the wedding dinner.
LATITIA. Oh, the worldly creatures!

 
EMMA. But to return to the old subject of fashions, Mr. Brightly, which was interrupted by Mr. Thornhill's admiration of his friend's liberality.
BRIGHTLY. Well, then, I ventured to say something, didn't I, against the short bunchy skirts and wide bladder-sleeves of the present belles, who seem to make a mock of their grandmothers for aiming to appear tall and slender.
EMMA. But their heads are dressed more simply, and    their characters are altogether more unaffected and natural and unpretending.
BRIGHTLY. Not a jot; such a woman as fourscore years ago would have been seen at a public sale with a wide-flounced farthingale and a lapdog under her arm, bidding for a China mandarin, is now to be met with at a morning lecture, with pencil and note-book in hand, losing two words of the learned professor's discourse for every one she writes down.
LATITIA. Nay, fie upon you for a discourteous knight! Do you come here on the summons of a lady to attend her tea-table, for the express purpose of casting ridicule on the whole sex?

 
BRIGHTLY. I thank you, Miss Vane, for reminding me of the purpose which brought me here; and the more so, that it is to hold judgment on yourself. But it cannot be done in this informal lazy manner; let every body stand round me, that I may open the proceedings with official decorum.
                                         They all rise from the tea-table and arrange themselves on the front of the Stage. Latitia Vane, Spinster, is called for. LATITIA. Present in the court.
BRIGHTLY. You compeer before me, charged with high crimes and misdemeanors committed against the King's liege subject, Sir Cameron Kunliffe, Baronet, tending to the great injury of his character,    to the impeding his usefulness in the country, and to the destroying of his influence in social society.
LATITIA holding up her hands. What a wicked creature I must be! But how do you make it to appear against me, my Lord Justice?
BRIGHTLY. It is proved against the defendant, that on the
 
th day of September of the present year, she sent for a certain phrenologist to her house, pretending to know the dispositions of men by certain marks on the surfaces of their pericraniums, and did wittingly and with malice prepense persuade the said Sir Cameron to submit his head to be examined by the said phrenologist.
LATITIA. Wittingly, but not maliciously: had not foolishly been a better word?
EMMA. Surely you will change the word so far in favour of the defendant.
BRIGHTLY. Not a bit: she wittingly entreated him to run the risk, knowing that there was risk, of losing that which, we are told by high authority, is better than gold. Who will live in amity and confidence with one who is scientifically proved to be predisposed to deeds of cruelty and destruction? Who will be connected with such a    one? who will give his daughter in marriage to such a one? who will accept of such a predisposed ruffian for her husband?
LATITIA. But it is all set right now, and has no evil consequences.

 
BRIGHTLY. I beg your pardon, lady: an evil report and its refutation are no fair match for one another. The first runs far a-field with the pace of a race-horse, the second follows after like a poor cudgelled donkey, and never clears a fourth part of the ground.
EMMA. You must own, my dear aunt, that this makes against you. I fear you will be obliged to stand in the church porch, with a sheet about you, for defamation.
SIR CAMERON. That would spread evil report the further.
BRIGHTLY. The prosecutor speaks reason; that would be no compensation at all for the injury, and he will not receive it as such.
LATITIA. What can be done, then, Mr. Justice?
BRIGHTLY. When the character of a bachelor is so injured by any woman, that he is, or may be, prevented from finding a suitable mate to solace his days, she is bound—in honour bound—to marry him herself.
THORNHILL.    A reparation, I believe, which they are generally
 
willing to make: I beg pardon; I mean, in most cases.
LATITIA. O dear, dear! how wide you stray from the purpose!
BRIGHTLY. That is as it may afterwards appear, lady.
THORNHILL. He has a sinister intention, Miss Vane.
BRIGHTLY. Keep silence in Court, I say.—The sinister intention is on his side, who, for his own interest, would prevent you from being just. But I would not press the matter upon you too severely; the reparation shall be left to your own discretion; but you must decide upon what it is to be, before the Court break up.
LATITIA. Decide so soon! Will not to-morrow do, or the day after to-morrow, or the day after that?
BRIGHTLY. No, neither to-morrow nor any following morrow will do; you must pronounce your own sentence before the Court break up.

 
LATITIA going about in a bewildered manner. O, dear! what can I do? what can I say? how shall I decide?
BRIGHTLY. Shall I decide for you, Madam?
LATITIA. Do, do! good Brightly, and don't tease me any more.
BRIGHTLY. And do you promise to abide by my judgment?
LATITIA.    I do promise: and you will be merciful.
BRIGHTLY. Well, then, be it known to all present, that inasmuch as you have nefariously injured the worthy baronet aforesaid, and it is your own indecision that prevents you from making him just reparation for the same, I adjudge that you, from this very time looking at his watch, shall remain under his command for five minutes and a half, bound afterwards faithfully to fulfil what in this given time he shall decree.
LATITIA. Let it be so; five minutes will soon be over, and he will be merciful.

 
SIR CAMERON. I fear you will not think so, Madam; for I command you to marry me to-morrow morning, before eleven of the clock.
LATITIA. O, shocking haste and precipitation! Not even a few months allowed to prepare my wedding-clothes!
SIR CAMERON. Not one hour beyond what I have said.
LATITIA. How peremptory you are!
EMMA. The best quality, my dear aunt, that your husband can have to match with your indecision.
LATITIA. What! are you against me, child? It is not for your interest.
EMMA. It is for my interest if it be for yours; and let me put this hand, which has always been kind to    me, into a stronger hand, that will bear the rule over it in kindness. Putting the hand of Latitia into that of Sir Cameron, who receives it with gallant respect.

 
SIR CAMERON. Thanks, gentle Emma; to find a friend in thee is more than I expected.
EMMA. Ah, Sir Cameron! but you should have expected it.
THORNHILL. If he could, without proof, have supposed any one to be good, it should have been this young lady.
BRIGHTLY. But he is too wise for that.
SIR CAMERON. Spare me, spare me; do not mar my present happiness by making me feel how little I deserve it.
FRANKLIN advancing from the rear to Sir Cameron . And may I be permitted to offer, perhaps, unexpected congratulations?
SIR CAMERON. Yes, thou mayest, and also advise and devise with my solicitor as much as thou wilt. That matter shall be no longer an annoyance to me.
FRANKLIN. What matter can you possibly allude to?

 
SIR CAMERON. O! you are quite ignorant of a certain misworded testament, the defects of which, by the management of a clever attorney, might be turned to thine own advantage: thou pleadest ignorant, very ignorant of all this.
BRIGHTLY. Ha, ha, ha! he will be an impudent fellow    indeed if he, before my face, plead ignorant of that which he told me without reserve some three or four years ago.
SIR CAMERON. Is it possible? did Hardy betray me then? To Franklin. 
FRANKLIN. No; but his clerk employed to copy the deed repeated to me soon after the very passage, word for word.
SIR CAMERON. And thou hast known it all this while, and never sought to take advantage of it till lately?
FRANKLIN. And you have known me all this while, nay, from my childhood, Sir Cameron, and can yet suppose that I should wish to wrest from you by law what natural justice and the intentions of the testator fairly bestow upon you.

 
SIR CAMERON covering his face with his hands. Say whatever you please to me: I am humbled to the dust; my infirmity is crime.
BRIGHTLY. Since you invite us to say whatever we please, I say that your crime has been punished already; for you have been oftener cheated and duped by your own supposed knowledge and your distrust of mankind, than the veriest flaxen-headed simpleton in the parish.
SIR CAMERON. Hold, hold, Brightly; I will not succumb to thee so meekly. If you have any candour, you must acknowledge I had cause for suspicion.    Any man would have been startled at the disappearance of that key after the mischievous urchin had been so strangely secreted in my library.
BRIGHTLY. Yes, a very strong circumstance, indeed, to justify all this disturbance. Did not you give me a key to let myself out by the small gate of your shrubbery?
SIR CAMERON. And what has that to do with it?
BRIGHTLY. It would not open the shrubbery-gate, and I
 
went round another way. Giving him a key. But, perhaps, it might have opened your strong box. I should have returned it to you sooner, had I not learned from your locksmith, that he had already changed the lock of that most secret repository.
SIR CAMERON. The very key, I must, with confusion, acknowledge. Is it possible that I should have taken the wrong key from that corner, and that having given a key to you should have entirely escaped my memory?
BRIGHTLY. Every thing is possible, when the imagination of a suspicious man is concerned.
SIR CAMERON. I am beaten to the ground! I am lower in my own opinion than my worst enemy would    have placed me, or even pointing to Brightly  this good-natured friend.—Dear Latitia, I am sensible of my infirmity; I am incapable of being a good husband to any woman; and though it has long been my ambition to be yours, I remit your engagement and restore you to your liberty.
BRIGHTLY eagerly. No, no, no! she is too generous to desert you in your hour of humiliation.

 
THORNHILL. Brightly, you are acting unfairly. You have no right to suggest to the lady what she ought to do.
BRIGHTLY. I don't act unfairly: we were each left at liberty to influence.
LATITIA. What is the meaning of this altercation?
BRIGHTLY. I care not for your paddock.
THORNHILL. Nor I for your picture; but let each of them be lost or won fairly.
LATITIA. What, in the name of wonder, are they disputing about? To Sir Cameron. 
SIR CAMERON. There is a bet in the case, I dare say.
BRIGHTLY to Sir Cameron . And if there be, your searching fancy will find it out.
SIR CAMERON. It concerns my marriage with Miss Vane;
 
tricky fellows! I wish we could contrive to make you both lose.
THORNHILL.    That is impossible; but at least let us wait till it be absolutely decided. The lady may accept her proffered liberty, or may change her mind, before eleven o'clock to-morrow morning.
LATITIA. Ay, now is my turn to have my infirmity exposed. But it only convinces me that I am a more suitable match for Sir Cameron, who in his state of humiliation, as he calls it, will learn to have patience with me; and I restore to him the hand he has released.
BRIGHTLY. Bravo! they are an equal match, and a happy union may it prove.
SIR CAMERON to Franklin . Come hither, cousin. You look less happy than I could wish; and happy as I now am, I wish to make myself a little happier. I have said that the thoughts of that bungled deed shall annoy me no more. I cannot part with that small estate upon which my mansion is placed, with its park and ancient oaks around it.— But the full value of the whole you shall receive from me, as soon as proper deeds of conveyance,
 
in which there shall be no mistakes, can be made out.
FRANKLIN. It is too much, cousin; I cannot—I cannot receive it.
SIR CAMERON.    Fie upon thee, man! hast thou an infirmity, too,—the infirmity of pride? It will promote my happiness: and it may enable thee, as soon as thou art in the receipt of ninety pounds a year from thy profession, to promote thine own, if thou canst prevail upon some good girl to unite her fate with thine. Dost thou wot of such a one? perhaps thou dost.
THORNHILL aside, eyeing Franklin and Emma anxiously. Now is the critical moment to strengthen my hopes or my fear.
                                          Franklin approaches Emma timidly, who motions him away, and he obeys, while Thornhill, with his face brightening up, goes close to her on the other side. THORNHILL aside. I see how it is, charming Emma; and may it not encourage me to hope that the engaging child from whose innocent head I cut off this fair
 
curl taking from his breast a paper some ten years ago, will now, in her womanhood, show me some favour?
BRIGHTLY overhearing him. You have a very soft voice, Thornhill, but my ears are quick. What is the meaning of these gentle approaches?
EMMA to Thornhill . Can my memory be so treacherous? Have we ever met before last spring, when I saw you in Brook Street?
THORNHILL. Yes, gentle creature, I saw you at your uncle's in Cheshire, where you were my harmless playfellow, and I became, by your own consent,    possessed of this cherished token, turning to Franklin, who goes up to him sternly, which shall be taken from me only with my life.
BRIGHTLY. Thornhill, thou art making a fool of thyself. The pretty child who was thy playfellow, and on whose head that curl once grew, bears indeed the same name with this lady, is her cousin, and has a strong resemblance to her, but is, I believe, at this moment in Rutlandshire, collecting pretty poesies for her album. Send her one of thy
 
sonnets, and thou wilt stand in as great favour with her as ever.
THORNHILL. Why did you not tell me this before?
BRIGHTLY. How should I divine all the romantic fancies of thy brain?
SIR CAMERON. I think his patience in giving that restless urchin lessons from Euclid, might have led you pretty near the truth.
BRIGHTLY. To be sure it might have done so, had Nature endowed me with the organ of suspectiveness.
SIR CAMERON. Say no more upon that subject, I beseech you. Any blackguard may henceforth pull my watch from its pocket, and I will only suppose that he wants, as the crowd presses round, to see what it is o'clock, poor youth!
LATITIA.    And I will be so constant to my purpose, that the most methodical lady of a parish district may make an appointment with me, and be sure of my being at her door, as her household clock gives warning for the hour. I will not even
 
change the colour of a scarf or a top-knot, having once said to my milliner, “It shall be this.”
BRIGHTLY. But how long will it be ere you have said so, when all the other colours of the rainbow are laid in array before you?
LATITIA. No more sarcastic insinuations! Sir Cameron and I will endeavour to reform; and a good beginning is equal to half the task, when there are kind friends to give encouragement.
                                         The Curtain drops. NOTES

BOY
BRIGHTLY
BRIGHTLY AND THORNHILL
BUTLER
DR. CRANY
EMMA
FIRST LADY
FIRST SERVANT
FLOUNCE
FOOTMAN
FRANKLIN
HOUSEKEEPER
HUMPHRIES
LATITIA
LAWRY
LOCKSMITH
OMNES
SECOND LADY
SERVANT
SIR CAMERON
THIRD LADY
THORNHILL




THE SIEGE: 
A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS. 


  


Front matter 

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

MEN. 

WOMEN. 


Count Valdemere . 
Baron Baurchel . 
Walter Baurchel , his Brother. 
Antonia , Baron de Bertrand. 
Dartz , his Friend. 
Page to Count Valdemere . 
Lorimore , his Valet. 
Hovelberg , a Jewel or Diamond Merchant. 
Soldiers, Servants, &c.
Countess Valdemere , Mother to the Count. 
Livia.
Jeanetta , Woman to the Countess. 
Nina.
Ladies, &c.

Scene , a Castle on the French confines of Germany. 



   


Main text 

ACT I. 

SCENE I. 

---A Grove near the Castle, with Part of the embattled Walls seen through the Trees: Enter Baron Baurchel and Walter Baurchel , speaking as they enter. 



Bar. 
Have done, Brother; I can bear it no longer. Hadst thou been bred in a cave of Kamschatka, instead of a mansion of civilized Europe, this savage plainness had been endurable: but--- 


Walt. 
I call a turnip a turnip, indeed, when other people say it is a peach or a nectarine; I call a pig a pig too, though they swear it is a fawn or an antelope; and they look at me, I confess, somewhat suspiciously, as if they expected to see a tail peeping from under my jerkin, or fur upon my hands like a bear.--- You would have me civilized, would you? It is too late in the day now, good sooth! 


Bar. 
Yes, the time is indeed gone by. This bachelor's life has brutified thee past all redemption. Why did you not marry Brother? 


   



Walt. 
Nay, you who have met with so many goddesses and creatures of perfection in the world, why did not you marry, Brother? I who could light upon nothing better than women--- mere women; every one of them too with some fault or failing belonging to her, as obvious as those white hairs that now look from under   your peruke, was it any marvel that I did not marry? 


Bar. 
Had your wife possessed as many faults as you do wrinkles on your forehead, you would have been the better for her; she would have saved thee, as I said before, from brutification. 


Walt. 
And your's would have saved you from dupification, dotification, and as many 'fications besides, as an old sentimental, hypocritical, greedy Dulcinea, can fasten on a rhyme-writing beau, who is stepping most unwillingly, with his lace-cloaked hose, over that ungracious line of division, that marks out his grand climacteric. 


Bar. 
Hypocritical! greedy! you don't know the delicacy of her mind: nothing can be more tender, more refined, more disinterested than her attachment to me. You don't understand her. 


Walt. 
Perhaps, I don't understand the attachments of the fair sex now-a-days. An old rich neighbour of mine informed me the other night, that he is going to marry his poor friend Spendall's youngest daughter, who has actually fallen in love with him; and nothing, as he tells me, almost in your own words, can be more tender, 

   

  more disinterested than her attachment. Not understanding these matters, Brother, I'll freely confess to you I did not give much credit to his story; but I may be wrong nevertheless. I dare say you believe it entirely. 


Bar. 
Ridiculous! What proofs can the fool possibly receive of her attachment? 


Walt. 
The very same which the Countess so condescendingly vouchsafes to yourself; she accepts of his presents. 


Bar. 
The very same! No, no, Walter Baurchel; very different! Does not every smile of her countenance, every look of her eyes, involuntarily express her partiality for me? 


Walt. 
Say, rather, every word of her tongue. 


Bar. 
With what generous enthusiasm did she not praise my sonnet to Sensibility. 


Walt. 
Aye, she is generous in what costs her little; for what are two or three lies, more or less, in the week's confession between her and Father Benedict? She'll scarcely eat a mouthful of partridge the less for it. 


Bar. 
O heartless infidel! Thou would'st mistrust the fond smiles of a mother caressing her rosy-faced infant. 


Walt. 
  By my faith, so I would, Baron, if that same infant brought a diamond necklace or a gold snuff-box in his hand for every kiss she bestowed upon him. Every sonnet you write costs you, one with another, a hundred louis d'ors. If all the money vanity filches from rich poets could be transferred to the pockets of poor ones, verse-making 

   

would be as good a business as shoe-making, or any other handicraft in the country. 


Bar. 
Hold thy unhallowed tongue! These subjects are not for thy rude handling. What is all this grumbling intended for? Tell me what you want, and have done with it; you who pique yourself so much on your plain speaking. 


Walt. 
Well, then; I want you to let the next six sonnets you write go unpraised, and give the money that should have paid for the praising of them, six hundred louis d'ors, as I reckon, to Antonia. Is it not a shame that your own ward and heir, in love with the Lady of this castle, as you very well know, cannot urge his suit with advantage, for want of the equipage and appendages becoming his rank; while this conceited Count, by means of his disinterested mother, drains your purse so freely; and is   thereby enabled to ruin the pretensions of him whom you ought to support? 


Bar. 
His pretensions are absurd, and cannot be supported. 


Walt. 
Why absurd? Is he not as brave, as well born, as handsome, too, as his rival? 


Bar. 
What signify all his good qualities? In the presence of his mistress he is an idiot. 


Walt. 
It is true, he loses all possession of himself in that situation, and therefore she despises him, while the gay confidence of the other delights her: but he should be supported and encouraged. 


Bar. 
How encouraged? Silly fellow! 


   



Walt. 
He feels too sensibly his disadvantages, and they depress him. He feels that he is not entitled to pretend to Livia, but as the probable heir of your estates; while your fantastical fondness for this woman and her son, makes it a doubtful matter whether you may not be tempted ---But hush! here she comes with her new-ruddled face, bearing her morning's potation of flattery with her, for a stomach of most wonderful digestion. 

Enter Countess Valdemere , who, after slightly noticing Walter , runs up caressingly to the Baron . 



Countess. 
How do you do, my dear Baron?   I hope you have passed the night in sweet repose. ---Yet, why do I hope it? You scarcely deserve that I should. 


Bar. 
And why so, Belinda? 



Walt. aside, making a lip at them 
Belinda, too! Sweet innocents! 


Bar. 
Why should you not hope that I have passed the night in repose? 


Countess. 
Because I am vindictive, and would be revenged upon you for making me pass a very sleepless one. 



Walt. aside 
Will she make love to him before one's very face. 


Bar. 
Then I am a culprit indeed, but an innocent one. What kept you awake? 


Countess. 
O, those verses of yours! those dear 

   

provoking verses! they haunted me the whole night. 
 Baron bows. 
But don't think I am going to talk to you of their beauties---those tender easy graces which they possess, in common with every thing that comes from your pen: I am going to tell you of their defects. You know well my friendship for you, my dear Baron, makes me sometimes severe. 



Bar. aside to Walt.  
There now, you Churl,   do you call this flattery? 
Aloud 
My dear Countess, your severity is kindness. 


Countess. 
Receive it then, as such; for indeed I must be very severe on the two last lines of the second stanza, which have disturbed me exceedingly. In the verses of an ordinary poet I should not find fault with them; but in a work, where every thing besides is easy, harmonious and correct, the slightest defect is conspicuous; and I must positively insist on your altering them, though you should hate me for being so fastidious. 



Bar. aside to Walt.  
There now, ungracious Canker-tongue, do you call this hypocrisy? 
Aloud 
Madam, I kiss the rod in so fair and so friendly a hand. Nay, it is a sceptre, to which I bow with devotion. 



Countess. to Walt.  
You see, good Sir, I take great liberties with the Baron, as, I doubt not, with the privilege of a brother, you yourself sometimes do. 


Walt. 
Yes, Madam, but my way of finding 

   

fault with him is somewhat different from yours. 


Countess. 
Yet you still find his generous spirit,   I am sure, submissive to the rod. 


Walt. 
I can't say I do, Madam. 


Countess. 
You are unfortunate enough, perhaps, to use it unskilfully. 


Walt. 
I am fortunate at present, however, in receiving so good a lesson from you, Madam. 


Countess. 
O no! there is no skill with me. There are persons to whom one cannot say one-half of what one really thinks, without being deemed a flatterer. 


Walt. 
In this, however, I have been more fortunate than you, Madam; for I have said to him what I have really thought for these forty years past, and have entirely escaped that imputation. 


Bar. 
Aye, flattery is a sin thou wilt never do penance for. Thou can'st rub the side of a galled jade with any tender-hearted innocent in Christendom, and be mighty surprised withal that the poor devil should be so unreasonable as to winch at it. 


Countess. 
Nay, nay, Baron! say not this of so good a brother, the shrewdness and penetration of whose mind are tempered, I am sure, with many amiable qualities. 


Walt. 
Nay, pray, Madam, spare me, and deal   with but one of us at a time. Such words will intoxicate a poor younger brother like myself, who is scarcely able to get a fowl for his pot, or 

   

new facings for his doublet, and cannot therefore be supposed to be accustomed to them. 


Countess. 
Sir, I understand not your insinuation. 


Bar. 
Regard him not, Madam: how should a mind, noble and delicate as your own, comprehend the unworthy thoughts of contemptible meanness?---Let me conduct you to company more deserving of you. Our fair Hostess, I suppose, is already in her grotto. 


Countess. 
No, she and my son are to follow me. But you must not go to the grotto with me now: no body is to see it till the evening. 



Bar. offering to lead her out 
A step or two only. 


Countess. 
O, not a step for the world! 

                                          Exit , Baron kissing her hand as she goes off. 



Bar. turning fiercely upon Walt.  
Thy unmannerly meanness is intolerable. Still hinting at the presents she receives. Greedy as thou call'st her, she never asked a gift from me in her life, excepting my picture in miniature, which could only be valuable to her as she prized the original. 


Walt. 
  Say rather, as her jeweller shall prize the goodly brilliants that surround it. 


Bar. 
What do you mean? 


Walt. 
What I should have told you before, if she had not interrupted us; that her trinket-broker is this very morning coming secretly, by appointment, to the castle, to treat with her 

   

for certain things of great value which she wishes to dispose of; and if your picture be not amongst them, I'll forfeit my head upon it. 


Bar. 
It is false. 


Walt. 
Here comes one who will confirm what I say. 

Enter Dartz . 



Walt. 
I'm glad to see you, Chevalier, for you can bear evidence to a story of mine that will not be believed else. 


Dart. 
This is a better reason for being so than most of my friends have to give. 


Walt. 
Is not Hovelberg, the jeweller, coming secretly to the castle to-day to confer with the Countess? 


Dart. 
Yes, he told me so himself; and added, with a significant smile, that she had some of her old ware to dispose of. 


Walt. 
Do you hear that, Brother? It was as   much as to say, she had often had such truckings with him before. Aye; you are not the only man who has thought his own dear resemblance lapped warmly behind the stomacher of his mistress, while, stripped of its jewels, it has been tossed into the drawer of some picture-monger, to be changed into a General of the last century, or one of the Grand-dukes of Austria. As for you, Brother, they'll put a black velvet cap on your head, and make you a good sombre doctor of theology. 


   



Bar. 
You shall not, however, make me the credulous man you think of, Walter Baurchel, with all your contrivances. 


Walt. 
And you don't believe us then? 


Bar. 
Are you fool enough to imagine I do? 


Walt. 
That were foolish enough, I grant you; for though an old lover has generally a strong vein of credulity about him, the current of his belief always sets one way; carrying withered nosegays, tattered billet-doux, broken posies, and all kinds of trumpery along with it at fifteen knots by the hour. 


Bar. 
Walter Baurchel! Walter Baurchel! flesh and blood cannot endure the offensive   virulence of thy tongue. 


Dart. 
He is indeed too severe with you, Baron; but what he tells you of Hovelberg is, nevertheless, very true. 


Bar. 
I'll believe neither of you: you are both hatching a story to deceive me. 

                                          Exit in anger. 



Walt. shrugging his shoulders and casting up his eyes 
What strong delusion we poor mortals may be blinded withal! That poor brother of mine believes, that the woman who refused to marry him when he was young and poor, yet smiles upon him, praises him, accepts presents from him when he is old and rich, must certainly entertain for him a most delicate, disinterested attachment; and you might as well overturn the walls of that castle with 

   

one stroke of your foot as beat this absurdity out of him. 


Dart. 
But you are too violent: it will not be beat out; it must be got out as it got in, with craft and discretion. 


Walt. 
Then devil take me for attempting it! for craft I have none, and discretion is a thing--- 


Dart. 
You will never have any thing to do with, I believe. 


Walt. 
  What then is to be done? If it were not that I cannot brook to see the conceited overbearing son of this Jezebel, carrying off the mistress of Antonia, I would even let the old fool sit under the tickling of her thievish fingers, and make as great a noodle of himself as he pleases.---But it must not be.---Fie upon it, Dartz! thou hast a good head for invention, while I, heaven help me! have only a good tongue for railing; do thou contrive some plot or other to prevent the disgrace of thy friend. 


Dart. 
Plots are not easily contrived. 


Walt. 
I know this, else I should have tried it myself. 


Dart. 
Are you well acquainted with the Count? 


Walt. 
I am but just come to the castle, where I have thrust myself in, though an unwelcome guest, to look after the interest of De Bertrand; and should be glad to know something more of the man who has so much intoxicated the gay Livia. What kind of a being is he? 


   



Dart. 
It would puzzle me as much as the contriving of your plot to answer that question. There is nothing real in him. He is a mere   package of pretences, poorly held together with sense and capacity enough, were it not for one defect in his nature, to make him all that he affects to be. He is a thing made up of seemings. 


Walt. 
Made up of seemings! 


Dart. 
Even so; for what in other men is reckoned the sincerest part of their character, his very self-conceit, is assumed. 


Walt. 
And what is the defect you hinted at? 


Dart. 
It has been whispered to me by an old school-fellow of his, that he is deplorably deficient in personal courage; which accounts for his mother's having placed him in the regiment of a superannuated General, and also, for the many complaints he makes of the inactivity of his commander. It is a whisper I am inclined to credit; and, if we must have a plot, it shall hinge upon this. 


Walt. 
My dear fellow! nothing can be better. Give it a turn or two in thy brains, and I'll warrant thou drawest it out again, shaped into an admirable plot. Direct all thyself, and I'll work under thee as a journey-man conspirator; for, as I said before, I have a ready tongue, but   a head of no invention. 


Dart. 
We must speak of this another time. See who approaches. 


Walt. 
Ha! the man we are speaking of, and 

   

the deluded Livia. By my faith he has a specious appearance! and the young fool looks at him too, as she would not look at a worthier man, whose merit might be tarnished with a few grains of modesty. 

                                         Enter Valdemere and Livia , followed by Jeanette carrying a basket filled with flowers, &c. 



Dart. to Liv.  
Permit me, Madam, to pay you my profound homage. 


Liv. 
You are welcome here, Chevalier: what accident procures me this pleasure? 
Aside to Count  
He'll make one more at our midnight revel in the grotto. 



Vald. Aside with some chagrin 
Are there not enow of us? 


Dart. 
Being in this part of the country on military duty, I could not resist the pleasure of paying my respects at the castle: and I honestly confess I had a secondary motive for my visit, expecting to find amongst your guests, my old friend and school-fellow Antonia. 


Liv. 
Baron de Bertrand, you mean. He was here yesterday, but I really forget whether   he went away or remained in the evening. 
Affecting to yawn 
Is he with us, or not Count? 



Walt. aside to Dart.  
Meet me by-and-by in my chamber. My tongue is unruly, and I had better go while I can keep it between my teeth. 

                                         Exit. 


   



Liv. 
Does not his amiable relation there, who steals from us so quietly, know where he is? 


Vald. 
If you are in quest of your friend, Chevalier, had you not better enquire at some of the peasants' houses in the neighbourhood? There may be some beauty in the village, perhaps, whose august presence a timid man may venture to approach, particularly if her charms should be somewhat concealed behind the friendly flax of her distaff. 


Dart. 
Pardon me, Count; I thought my friend had aspired to a beauty, whose charms would have pleased him, indeed, behind the flax of a distaff, but will not, I trust entirely intimidate him from the more brilliant situation in which fortune has placed them. Aye; that glance in your eye, and that colour in your cheek, charming Livia, tell me, I am right. 


Liv. 
  They speak at random then; for it would puzzle a much wiser head than I wear on my shoulders to say what are his pretensions. He visits me, it is true, but suddenly takes his leave again, and the very next day, perhaps, as suddenly returns. 


Vald. 
Like poor puss with roasted chesnuts before her, who draws back her burnt paw every time she attempts them, but will not give up the attack. He may, however, after some more of those hasty visits, find courage for it at last. 


Dart. 
There is one attack, however, for 

   

which he never lacks courage; when the enemies of his country are before him. 


Vald. 
True; he is brave in the field, but he is fortunate also. He serves under an active Commander, while I waste my ardour in listless inactivity. 


Dart. 
Cheer up then, noble Count, I have good news to tell you upon this score. 


Vald. 
On this score! Is any change to take place? 
In a feeble voice. 



Dart. after a pause 
You are too well bred to be impatient for an answer. 


Vald. 
  O no! You mistake me; I am very impatient; I am on fire to hear it. 


Dart. 
Expand then your doughty breast at thoughts of the glorious fields that are before you: your old General is set aside, and the most enterprising man in the service, Count--- himself is now your Commander. 
After a momentary pause, and eyeing him keenly 
Silent joy, they say, is most sincere; you are, I perceive, considerately and profoundly glad. 



Vald. assuming suddenly great animation 
O immeasurably so. Great news indeed!--- Strange---I mean very admirable news, if one could be sure it were true. 


Dart. 
True! Who doubts, what delights him? 


Vald. 
I thought the regiment was promised to another person; I was not prepared to hear it. 


Dart. 
So it appeared. 


   



Vald. 
But I am delighted---I can't express it:---I'm glad to a folly. Tol de rol---tol de rol--- 

                                         Singing and skipping about affectedly. 


Liv. 
Cruel creature! to sing at what, perhaps, will make others weep. 


Vald. 
Weep!---No I don't weep. I am   happy to a folly, but I don't weep. 
Skipping about again. 
Tol lol de rol!---plague take these stones! this ground is abominably rough. 


Dart. 
Fie upon it! any ground is smooth enough for a happy man to skip upon. 


Liv. 
You smile, Dartz; your news is of your own invention. 


Dart. 
Not absolutely, Madam; there was such a rumour. 



Vald. eagerly 
A rumour! only a rumour! Why did you say it was true? 


Dart. 
To give you a moment's pleasure, Valdemere. If you have enjoyed it, you are a gainer; and the disappointment, I hope, will not break your heart. 


Vald. 
It is cruel indeed. But who can feel disappointment in this fair presence. 
Bowing to Liv.  
Let us go to the grotto, charming Livia; we waste our time here with folly.---Give me thy basket, child, 
to Jean.  
I'll dispose of every chaplet it contains to admiration. I'll hang them all up with mine own hand. 


Liv. 
Don't be so very active: you positively shan't follow me to the grotto: I told you so before. 


   



Vald. 
  Positive is a word of no positive meaning when it enforces what we dislike. However, since you forbid it, I will not follow you; I'll go by your side, which is far better, and support your fair hand on my arm. 
Putting Livia 's arm in his with conceited confidence. 


Liv. 
What a sophistical explanation of my words! a heretical theologian is a joke to you. 



Vald. Casting a triumphant look behind him to Dartz , as he leads her off 
Good morning, Chevalier, you go in quest of your friend, I suppose. Pray tell him to take courage, and be less diffident of his own good parts, and he may at last be promoted, perhaps, to the good graces of his Quarter-Master's daughter. 


Dart. 
No body at least, who sees Count Valdemere in his present situation, will think of recommending modesty to him. 

                                          Exeunt Vald. and Liv. followed by Jean. 


Dart. 
Impudent puppy! his triumph shall be short. Blind woman! are flattery and impudence so necessary in gaining your favour, that all other qualities, without them, are annihilated? He shall this very night pay dearly for his presumption. 

                                         Exit. 


   


ACT II. 

SCENE I. 

---A room in the Castle; enter Walter Baurchel and Dartz , by opposite Sides. 



Walt. 
Ha , my good Friend! punctual to a wish! You have got your head stored I hope with a good plot. 


Dart. 
I am at least more in the humour for it than I was. I have found his conceit and arrogance more intolerable than I imagined. I have touched him in the weak part too, and find him vulnerable. 


Walt. 
Well, but the plot. 


Dart. 
I have discovered also a trait of villainy in him, that would prick me on to the charge were I sluggish as a tortoise. 


Walt. 
So much the better. Now for the plot. 


Dart. 
As I passed just now through the little green copse near the postern, a beautiful girl crossed my way, and in tears. 


Walt. 
Tut! she has crossed thy wits too. 


Dart. 
Have patience; she'll be useful.---I questioned her gently. 


Walt. 
Aye; gently enough I doubt not. 


Dart. 
And find she is sister to that shrewd little fellow the Count's page: that her affections have been gained and betrayed by Valdemere;   and she is now hovering about the castle, 

   

for an opportunity of upbraiding him, or in the vain hope, perhaps, of moving his pity. 


Walt. 
She has moved thy pity at least; what has all this to do with our plot? 


Dart. 
A great deal: I am telling you before hand what we shall have to work upon: a plot cannot, any more than a coat, be made without materials. 


Walt. 
Well, but shew me thy pattern first, and talk of the buttons and buckram afterwards. 


Dart. 
Be it so then, since you are so impatient. There is a friend of mine stationed about a league hence with his regiment; where he is to wait till he is joined by another detachment of the army, as the enemy, it is feared, may penetrate to these parts, and overrun the country. I mean to go to him immediately; make him privy to our design, and engage him to send a party of his soldiers to make a sham attack upon the castle at midnight, when we shall all be assembled at this fanciful banquet in the grotto. 



Walt. nodding his head 
Good. 


Dart. 
Valdemere then, as the gallant soldier   he affects to be, and the favoured admirer too of the lady, must of course take upon himself the defence of her castle. 



Walt. nodding again 
Very good. 


Dart. 
This will quell his presumption, I trust; and expose him to Livia for the very paltry being that he is. 


   



Walt. 
Aye, so far good; you'll make some furtherance to the plot out of this. 


Dart. 
Some furtherance to the plot! Why this is the plot itself. 


Walt. 
The plot itself! Any simple man in the country might have devised as much as this comes to. 


Dart. 
It does not please you then because it is not intricate. But don't despise it entirely; though the outline is simple, tricks and contrivances to work up the mind of our victim to the state that is suited to our purpose, will enrich it as we proceed; and the Page I have mentioned, provoked by the wrongs of his sister, will be our subtle and diligent agent. Nay, should we draw Valdemere into great disgrace, we may bribe him, by concealing his dishonour, to marry the poor girl he has wronged. 


Walt. 
  Ha! this indeed is something like a plot.---And Antonio's marriage with Livia, how is that to be fastened to the end of it? 


Dart. 
Nay, I have no certain hook, I confess, to hang that upon. It must depend on the Baron; for unless he declare Antonio his heir, he will never venture to propose himself as a match for the well-dowried Livia. But we shall manage matters ill, if we cannot draw the Baron into our scheme. 


Walt. 
Then a fig for your plot! It is as bare of invention as the palm of my hand. 


Dart. 
This is always the case with those who lack invention themselves: they are never 

   

pleased with that of any other person, if it be not bristled over with contrivances like a hedgehog. And I must be allowed to say, Mr. Walter Baurchel, that he who racks his brains for your service, works for a thankless master. 


Walt. 
He works for an honest one, then. 


Dart. 
Away with the honesty that cannot afford a few civil words to a friend, who is doing his best to oblige you! As much duplicity as this amounts to, would not much contaminate your virtue. 


Walt. 
  Well, well, I am wrong, perhaps, but thou art as testy as myself. 


Dart. 
Because I won't bear your untoward humour. Some people find every body testy who approaches them, and marvel at their own bad luck.---But no more of this: let us think of our friend. Does the Baron believe what you told him of Hovelberg's appointment with the Countess? 


Walt. 
He makes a shew of not believing it, but I think he has his own suspicions at bottom; for his valet tells me, he has sent to desire Hovelberg to speak with him as soon as he arrives. 


Dart. 
Here comes De Bertrand; I hear his steps. 


Walt. 
Is he returned to the castle? 


Dart. 
Yes; I forgot to tell you so, you were in such a hurry for your plot. 


Walt. 
Silly fellow! he cannot stay away from his capricious mistress, though the first glance of her eye sinks him to a poltron at once. 


   

Enter Antonio . 




Ant. to Walt.  
Good morning, gentle Kinsman; ---but methinks you are not very glad to see me; these are not looks of welcome. 


Walt. 
Thou art one of those that trouble me. 


Ant. 
  I am of a pretty numerous class of beings then, from the kitten that gnaws at your shoestring, to the Baron, who spoils your best pen in writing love-verses to his mistress. 


Walt. 
Well; and they would torment any man. Love-verses! with such an old painted hypocrite for the object of them! 


Ant. 
His first love, you know; his Delia. 


Walt. 
His Delia! His delusion. Is there such a thing as witchcraft in the world? I believe in good earnest there is. Her dominion over him is a mystery; a more than Egyptian blindness. 


Ant. 
Nay, you have yourself in a good degree to blame for it, my good Sir. Had you encouraged his humour, harmless as it is; bestowing some praise on his verses, and less abuse on the too youthful cut of his peruke, she could never have taken possession of him as she has done. 


Walt. 
Praise his verses, and not abuse his peruke! it had been beyond the self-denial of a faint. 


Dart. 
And had you--- 



Walt. to Dart.  
One assailant at a time, if   you please. 


   



Dart. 
Excuse me, Sir; I must needs say, had you even paid a little attention to the Countess herself, when she first renewed her intimacy with the Baron, she would have been less anxious, perhaps, to estrange him from his old friends. 


Walt. 
Attention to her! I could not have done it to gain myself, like Mahomet, the entrance to the seventh heaven. I must tell people plainly what I think of them, though I should hang for it. 


Dart. 
Had you said starve for it, you had named the fate that more commonly attends plain speaking. 


Ant. 
And in telling people disagreeable truths to gratify your own humour too, are you surprised, my good Sir, that they should not be edified thereby? 



Walt. to Ant.  
What, young Soldier, you are become a plain speaker too. 


Ant. 
Just to shew you, Sir, how agreeable it is. 


Walt. 
Ha, ha, ha! Well; thou hast the better of me now. Would thou could'st prate as briskly   to thy mistress! that would do more for thee in one hour than all thy bashful tenderness in a year. 


Ant. 
I might---I should indeed---I defend not my weakness.---You promised on this point to spare me. 


Walt. 
Aye, the very sound of her name quells 

   

thy spirit, and makes thee hesitate and stammer like a culprit. It is provoking. 


Dart. 
You profess a violent detestation of conceit, my shrewd Sir; where, then, is your indulgence for modesty? 


Walt. 
You mistake the matter, Dartz. Your friend there, has a good a conceit of himself as any man: he is not modest but bashful; a weakness too that only besets him in the presence of his mistress. By this good fist of mine! it provokes me almost to the cudgelling of such an unaccountable ninny. But I would cudgel thee, and serve thee too, De Bertrand. Take courage; we have a plot in our heads to make a man of thee at last. 



Dart. aside, pulling Walt. by the sleeve 
Say not a word of the plot: his sense of honour is so delicate, he would recoil at it. 


Ant. 
  A plot did you say? 


Walt. 
Aye, a kind of a plot;---that is to say ---What kind of a plot is it Dartz? 


Dart. 
Have you forgot your own scheme for cheating the virtuoso, when your cabinet of antiquities comes to the hammer? 


Walt. 
By my fay! this memory of mine is not worth a pinch of tobacco. 
Seeing Ant. look at his watch 
Art thou going any where? 


Ant. 
No;---I did think---I believe I shall take a turn on the terrace. 



Dart. to Ant.  
I understand you: take a turn in the cabinet of paintings rather; that will suit your purpose better. 


   



Ant. 
May I presume to go there? 


Walt. 
Presume, Simpleton! That impudent puppy of a Count lords it in her dressing-room. Go thy ways! 
pushing him off the stage with slight anger: Exit Antonio . 
That fellow provokes me; yet there is something in him that goes so near my heart: he is more akin to me than his blood entitles him to be: he is like a part of myself. 


Dart. 
Not the least like it. Now that you have taught us to speak plainly, I must needs   say, were he at all like yourself, you would disinherit him in the course of a month. 


Walt. 
You are right, perhaps.---But alas! he would not be much the poorer for being disinherited by me. O that old fool of a brother! I could flog him for his poetry! 


Dart. 
Have patience, and we may find a better way of dealing with him. If we could persuade him to disguise himself like a diamond merchant, and accompany Hovelberg when he visits the Countess, he would be convinced of the true nature of her regard for him. 


Walt. 
An excellent thought! This is just what was wanting to make our plot really like a plot. 


Dart. 
I'm glad it pleases you at last.---Before I leave the castle to negociate with my friend for his myrmidons, I'll find out the Baron, and endeavour to persuade him. 


Walt. 
Heaven prosper thee! but return, ere thou goest, and let me know the result. 


   



Dart. 
Depend upon it. 

                                          Exeunt severally. 

SCENE II. 

A Room hung with Paintings, and otherwise enriched with Carving and Ornaments, &c. Enter Valdemere and Antonio . 



Vald. 
Here are some good paintings, De Bertrand; if you have any taste for the art, they will please you. This Guido on the left is a divine thing. The Magdalen in Count Orrinberg's collection was considered as superior to it; but I always maintained this to be the best painting of the two, and the world have at last adopted my opinion. I have always decidedly thought---But you are not looking at it. Is there any thing in that door to arrest your attention? The carving on it is but indifferent. 


Ant. 
I thought I heard footsteps. She's coming. 


Vald. 
Pooh! she won't be here this half hour; so you need not yet take alarm, as if an enemy were advancing upon you. 


Ant. 
You connect the idea of alarm with an enemy; would I had firmness to face what I love! You are a happy man, Valdemere, and a bold one too, most assuredly: what would not I give for a little of your happy self-possession. 


Vald. 
Aye; it is an article of some value: he who can't possess himself, must not expect to possess his mistress. 


   



Ant. 
  A very specious maxim this, from a young fellow's mouth with the manliness of well-curled whiskers to support it: yet I have seen the embarrassment of a diffident character plead its own cause more effectually than the eloquence of a brazen-browed Barrister. At least I have always felt it have more power over me. 


Vald. 
That is natural enough: it is a common selfish sympathy: one thief pities another when the rope is round his neck. Feeling for others is the consequence of our own imperfections; this is a known truth. 


Ant. 
Establish it if you can, Valdemere, for it will go well nigh to prove you immaculate. 


Vald. 
How far soever I may be from that degree of perfection, jealousy at least is not one of my faults, since I have introduced a rival into the apartments of my mistress, where he had not the courage to venture alone, and am also pointing out to him what he has not discovered for himself, that her picture is now before his eyes. 

                                         Pointing to a picture. 



Ant. looking up to it eagerly 
It is somewhat like. 


Vald. 
She sat for it at my request: no one   else could prevail on her. The painter knew my taste in these matters, and has taken wonderful pains with it. 



Ant. sighing 
You have indeed been honoured. 


   



Vald. 
He has made the eyes to look upon you with such expression. 


Ant. 
Think you so? To me he appears to have failed in this respect; or perhaps it is because any semblance of eyes which I can thus stedfastly look upon, are not to me the eyes of Livia. 


Vald. 
I did not suspect you to be so fastidious. 


Ant. 
Not so neither. But surely eyes of such vivid expression should never be painted as looking at the spectator; for what pencil in the world can produce the effect he demands? They should be directed to some other object; and then he sees them as he has been accustomed to see them. 

Enter Livia behind them. 



Vald. 
Perhaps you are right: you talk like a connoisseur on the subject. 


Liv. 
I come in good time then; for connoisseur or not, to hear De Bertrand talk at all is a very lucky adventure. You have wronged us much, Baron, to keep us so long ignorant of   your taste for the fine arts. 



Ant. embarrassed 
Madam, I am much honoured. I am very little--- 
mumbling words in a confused way that are not heard. 
I am very much obliged to you. 


Liv. 
You are grateful for slight obligations. But you are looking at my picture, I see, which was painted two years ago at the request of a 

   

good old uncle of mine; pray give me your opinion of it. 


Ant. 
It appears---it is very charming. It is---that is, I suppose, it is very finely painted. 


Liv. 
It is reckon'd so: and it certainly does more than justice to the original. 
 Ant. hesitates as if he would speak but remains silent. 
You are of my opinion, I perceive, or at least too well bred to contradict me. Confess it freely: you are of my opinion. 


Ant. 
O entirely, Madam. 


Liv. 
You flatter me exceedingly. 


Ant. 
I meant it in simple sincerity. 


Liv. 
O, sincere enough I doubt not. 


Vald. 
And surely you will not question its simplicity. 



Liv. to Vald. , turning from Ant. with pity and contempt 
Don't let us be too hard upon him.   Pray look at that picture of my great Aunt who was a celebrated beauty. 



Vald. gazing with affected admiration at Livia 's picture 
I have no eyes for any other beauty than what I now gaze upon. 


Liv. 
And do you indeed admire this picture so much? 


Vald. 
The faintest resemblance of its fair original is fascinating. Yet methinks the painter has failed in the expression of the eyes. But any eyes indeed that I can look thus stedfastly upon, are not to me the eyes of Livia. 


Liv. 
Ah! these are in truth the words of a too partial friend. 


Vald. 
Words from the heart, divine Livia, 

   

will tell from whence they came. 
They both walk to the bottom of the stage, speaking in dumb-shew, while Ant. remains in the front. 



Ant. aside 
With my own words he woos her, and before my face too.---Matchless impudence! ---And such a man as this pleases Livia! ---He whispers in her ear, and she smiles.---My heart sickens at it.---I'll look no more, lest I become envious and revengeful, and hateful to myself.---O Nature! hast thou made me of such poor stuff as this? 



Vald. turning round from the bottom of the stage 
Ha, De Bertrand! are you declaiming? Some speech of a tragedy, I suppose, from the   vehemence of your gesture. Pray let Livia hear you: she is partial, you know, to every thing you do, and finds every exhibition you make before her particularly amusing. 



Ant. sternly 
Come nearer to me, Sir; the first part of my speech is for your private ear.--- Come nearer. 


Liv. 
Pray go to him: by the tone of his voice he personates some tyrant, and must be obeyed. 


Ant. 
Yes, Sir, I must be obeyed. 
Vald. shuffles up to him unwillingly, and Ant. speaks in his ear. 
Take no more impertinent liberties with me in this lady's presence, or be prepared to justify them elsewhere. 

                                          Exit , looking at Vald. sternly, who remains silent. 



Liv. advancing to the front 
What is the matter, Count? 


Vald. 
Nothing---nothing at all. 


   



Liv. 
Nay something unpleasant has passed between you. 


Vald. 
I believe I did wrong: I should have treated him more gently. But the strangeness of his behaviour obliged me to use threatening words, upon which he withdrew, and chose not to understand them. 


Liv. 
How ill one judges then by dumb-shew of what passes at a distance. 


Vald. 
  I am always calm on these oocasions, while he assumes the fierceness of a boaster. 


Liv. 
But you will not call him out for such a trifle. 


Vald. 
Not for the world, divine Creature, if it give you uneasiness. 


Liv. 
How gentle you are! The brave are always so. 


Vald. 
How can I be otherwise with such an angel to prompt me? No; the braggard may live in safety for me; I will not harm one hair of his head. 


Liv. 
I thank you, dear Valdemere! and now to recompense your goodness, I'll shew the beautiful gem I promised you: follow me. 


Vald. 
Yes, bewitching Maid! to the world's end, to the bottom of the ocean, to the cannon's brazen mouth, I would follow thee. 

                                          Exeunt . 


   


SCENE III. 

The Countess's dressing Room: She enters from an inner Chamber with a small shagreen Case in her Hand, followed by Jeanetta , carrying a Casket which she sets upon a Table. 



Countess. 
Jeanetta! let me take a last look of those dear things before I part with them for ever. 


Jean. 
I'm sure, my Lady, they are so handsome, and you look so handsome when you wear them, it would go to my heart to part with them. 


Countess. 
But my dear boy must have money, Jeanetta, and I have been expensive myself. 
Opens the casket, and looks at the jewels. 
My diamonds, my pearls, my rubies, my darlings! for the sake of a still greater darling I must part with you all. 


Jean. 
But if I might presume to speak, my Lady; don't you indulge the young Count too much in extravagance? 


Countess. 
O no, Jeanetta; I doat upon him: it is this amiable weakness of character which all the world remarks and admires in me. And he loves me entirely too; he would sacrifice his life for my sake. 


Jean. 
He'll sacrifice nothing else, however; for he never gives up the smallest convenience of his own to oblige you. 


Countess. 
Small things are of no consequence:   he would give up for me, I am confident, the 

   

thing most dear to his heart: and for him--- to see him lord of this castle and its domains, and occupying in society the brilliant place that becomes him, I would---what would I not sacrifice! 


Jean. 
Were he to live on the fortune he has, and marry where he is attach'd, he might perhaps be happier. 


Countess. 
Happier! Were he mean enough to be happy so---contemptible thought!---I would see him in his grave rather.---But no more of this: have you seen Hovelberg? You say he is waiting below. 


Jean. 
Yes, Madam, and a friend with him; an Armenian Jew-merchant, who will, he says, go halves in his purchases, and enable him to give you a better price for the jewels, as he is himself rather low in cash at present. 


Countess. 
Well; I'll object to neither Jew nor Infidel that puts money into my pocket. 
Holding up a ruby necklace. 
This should fetch something considerable. 


Jean. 
O la, Madam! you won't part with that surely: your neck is like alabaster under it.   Did you but know how they admired you at Prince Dormach's the last time you wore it.--- I would sell the very gown from my back ere I parted with it. 


Countess. 
So they admired me at Prince Dormach's then? 


Jean. 
O dear, my Lady! the Prince's valet told me, though two young beauties from 

   

Brussels were there, nobody spoke of any one but you. 


Countess. 
Well; to please thee, then, I'll keep it. 


Jean. 
La! here is a little emerald ring, my Lady; those brokers will despise such a trifle, and give you a mere nothing for it.---La, who would think it! it fits my fingers to a hair. It must be a mort too large for your delicate hand. 


Countess. 
Keep it for thyself then, since it fits thee. He was a great fool who gave it me, and had it made of that awkward size. 


Jean. 
I thank you, my Lady; I wish you would give me every thing in this precious casket that has not been the gift of a sage. 


Countess. 
Thou art right, Child. It would put many a hundred louis-d'ors into thy pocket,   and leave scarcely a marverdi for myself.---A rich Knight of Malta gave me these 
holding up a string of pearls 
, whose bandy legs were trick'd out most delicately in fine-clocked hose of the nicest and richest embroidery. Rest his soul! I made as much of those legs as the hosier did. 


Jean. 
I doubt it not, Madam, and deserved what you earned full as well. 



Countess. looking again at her pearls 
There is not a flaw in any one of them. 


Jean. 
Aye; commend me to such legs! had they been straighter, the pearls had been worse. 


Countess. 
This amber box with brilliants I had from an old croacking Marquis, who pestered 

   

every music room in the principality to the day of his death, with notes that would have frightened a peacock. As long as he sang, poor man! I considered myself as having a salary on the musical establishment at the rate of two hundred ducats per month. 


Jean. 
Aye; God send that all the old Marquises in these parts, would croak for us at this rate. 


Countess. 
I have no reason to complain: my   present friend bleeds as freely as any of his predecessors. 


Jean. 
So he should, my Lady. Such nonsense as he writes ought not to be praised for a trifle. I would not do it, I'm sure. 


Countess. 
Dost thou ever praise then for profit? 


Jean. 
To be honest with you, Madam, I have done it, as who has not? But never since I entered your Ladyship's service; for why should you reward me for praising you, when all the world does it for nothing?---No, no, my Lady; you are too wise for that. 


Countess. 
There is somebody at the door. 


Jean. 
It is Hovelberg. 


Countess. 
Open then, but let nobody else in. 

 Jean. opens the door, and Hovelberg enters, followed by Baron Baurchel , disguised as an Armenian Jew. 



Countess. 
I am happy to see you, dear Hovelberg; and this Gentleman also, 
curtesying to the Bar.  
I know it is only a friend whom we 

   

may trust, that you would introduce to me on the present occasion. 


Hov. 
To be sure, Madam: a friend we may depend on. 
Drawing Countess aside, and speaking in her ear 
A man of few words: better to do in this quarter than this. 
Pointing first to his pocket, and then to his head. 
And that is a   good man, you know, to be well with. 


Countess. 
O the best stuff in the world for making a friend of. 
Returning to the Bar.  
Sir, I have the highest regard and esteem for you. 



Bar. in a feigned voice 
On vatch account, Madam? 


Countess. 
O good Sir! on every account. 


Baron. 
You lov'sh not my religion? 


Countess. 
I respect and reverence it profoundly. 


Bar. 
You lov'sh not my pershon? 


Countess. 
It is interesting and engaging, most assuredly. 


Bar. 
No body telsh me sho before. 


Countess. 
Because the world is full of envious people, who will not tell you truths that are agreeable. 



Bar. nodding assent 
Now I understant. 


Countess. 
Yes, dear Sir; you must do so; your understanding is unquestionable. 
Looking archly to Hovel.  
And now, Gentlemen, do me the honour to be seated, and examine these jewels attentively. 


Hov. 
We would rather stand if you'll permit us. 


   




Countess. aside to Hovel. , while the Baron examines the jewels 
My dear Hovelberg, be   liberal; for the sum I want is a large one, and those jewels would procure it for me any where; only, regarding you as my friend, I give you the first offer.---But your friend, methinks, examines every thing with great curiosity. 


Hov. 
Yes, poor man! he likes to appear as knowing as he can: this is but natural, you know, when one is deficient in the upper department. ---But he'll pay like a Prince, if you flatter and amuse him. 


Bar. 
Vasht fine stones! Vasht pretty ornaments! 
To Countess  
You dishposhe of all deshe? 


Countess. 
Yes, every thing. 


Bar. 
Dere be gifsh here, no doubt, from de dear friensh. 


Hov. 
Or some favoured lover, perhaps. 



Countess. sighing affectedly 
Perhaps so; but I must part with them all. 



Bar. aside to Hov.  
Nay, she has some tenderness for me: put her not to too severe a trial. 



Hov. aside 
We shall see. 



Bar. returning to Countess  
You be woman; and all womansh have de affections for some one   lover or frient. 


Countess. 
O how good and amiable and considerate you are! I have indeed a heart formed for tenderness. 


   




Bar. drawing Hovel. aside again 
She does love me, Hovelberg: tempt her not with an extravagant price for the picture. 



Hov. aside 
I'll take a better way of managing it. 
Returning to the Countess  
My Friend desires me to say, Madam, that, if there is any thing here you particularly value, he'll advance you money upon it, which you may pay at your leisure, and you shall preserve it. 



Countess. to Baron  
How generous you are, my dear Sir! Yes; there is one thing I would keep. 



Bar. eagerly 
One ting---dere be one ting: tish picture, perhaps. 


Countess. 
This ruby necklace. 


Bar. 
You sell tish picture, den? 


Countess. 
To be sure, if you'll purchase it. 


Hov. 
The diamonds are valuable, indeed; but you will not sell the painting? 


Countess. 
That will depend on the price you offer for it. 


Hov. 
  Being a portrait, it is of no value at all, but to those who have a regard for the original. 


Jean. 
And what part of the world do they live in, Mr. Hovelberg? Can you find them out any where? 


Countess. 
Nay, peace, Jeanetta.---As a portrait, indeed, it is of no value to any body, but, as a characteristic old head, it should fetch a good price. 
Shewing it to Baron  
Observe, my dear Sir, that air of conceit and absurdity 

   

over the whole figure: to those who have a taste for the whimsical and ridiculous, it would be invaluable. Don't you perceive it? 


Bar. 
Not very sure. 


Countess. 
Not sure! Look at it again. See how the eyes are turned languishingly aside, as if he were repeating, "Dear gentle idol of a heart too fond." 
Mimicking the Baron's natural voice. 


Hov. 
Ha, ha, ha! Your mimickry is excellent, Countess. Is it not, Friend Johnadab? 


Bar. 
O, vasht comical. 



Hov. aside to him 
She has a good talent. 



Bar. aside 
Shrewd witch! The words of my last sonnet, indeed; but I did not repeat them so. 



Hov. aloud 
  Though you are an admirable mimick, Madam, my Friend Johnadab does not think your imitation of the Baron entirely correct. 



Countess. alarmed 
He knows the Baron, then; I have been very imprudent.---But pray don't suppose I meant any disrespect to the worthy Baron, whom I esteem very much. 


Bar. 
O vasht much! 


Hov. 
Be not uneasy, Madam; my Friend will be secret, and loves a joke mightily. 


Countess. 
I'll trust, then, to his honour: and since he does not like my imitation of the Baron, he shall have it from one who does it better than I. Jeanetta, amuse this worthy gentleman by repeating the Baron's last sonnet. 


   



Jean. 
Nay, my Lady, you make me do it so often, I'm tired of taking him off. 


Countess. 
Do as you are bid, Child. 

Jean. 
"Dear gentle idol of a heart too fond, 
"Why doth that eye of sweetest sympathy---" 

Hov. 
Ha, ha, ha! Excellent! 


Bar. off his guard 
By Heaven, this is too bad! Your servants taught to turn me into ridicule! 



Countess. starting 
  How's this? Mercy on me! 


Hov. 
Be not alarmed, Countess; I thought he would surprise you. My Friend is the best mimick in Europe. 


Countess. 
I can scarcely recover my surprise. 
To Baron  
My dear Sir, I cannot praise you enough. You have a wonderful talent. The Baron's own mouth could not utter his voice more perfectly than yours. 



Bar. pulling off his cap and beard 
No, Madam, not easily. 
 Jean. shrieks out, and the Countess stands in stupid amazement. 
This disguise, Madam, has procured for me a specimen of the amiable dispositions of a heart formed for tenderness, with a sample of your talents for mimickry into the bargain; and so I wish you good day, with thanks for my morning's amusement. 



Countess. recovering herself 
Ha, ha, ha! You understand mumming very well, Baron, but I still better. I acted my part well. 


   



Bar. 
Better than well, Madam: it was the counter-part of my enacting the Baron. 


Jean. 
Indeed, dear Baron, the Countess knew it was you, and so did I too. Indeed, indeed   we did. I'm sure it is a very good joke: I wonder we don't laugh more at it than we do. 


Bar. 
Be quiet, subordinate Imp of this arch Tempter! My thraldom is at an end; and all the jewels in that shameful heap were not too great a price for such emancipation. 
Bowing very low to Countess  
Adieu most amiable, most sentimental, most disinterested of women! 

                                         Exit. 


Countess. 
Hovelberg, you have betrayed me. 


Hov. 
How so, Madam? You told me yourself you were the most sincere woman in the world; the Baron doubted your regard for him; how could I then dissuade him from putting it to the proof, unless I had doubted your word, Madam? An insult you could never have pardoned. 


Countess. 
What, you laugh at me, too, you villain! 
Exit Hovel.  
Oh! I am ruined, derided and betrayed! 
Throws herself into a chair, covering her face with her hand, while Jeanetta endeavours to comfort her. 


Jean. 
Be not so cast down, my Lady, there are more than one rich fool in the world, and you have a good knack at finding them out. 


Countess. 
O, that I should have been so unguarded! That I should never have suspected! 


   



Jean. 
Aye, with his vasht this, and his vasht   that: it was, as he said, vasht comical that we did not. 


Countess. 
Bring not his detested words again to my ears; I can't endure the sound of them. 

Enter Valdemere . 



Vald. 
Well, Madam, you can answer my demands now, I hope: Hovelberg has been with you. Money, money, my dear mother! 
Holding out his hand 
There is a fair broad palm to receive it; and here 
kissing her hand coaxingly 
is a sweet little hand to bestow it. 



Countess. pushing him away sternly 
Thy inconsiderate prodigality has been most disastrous, Had'st thou been less thoughtless, less profuse--- a small portion of prudence and economy would have made us independent of every dotard's humour. 


Vald. 
Notable virtues indeed, Madam; but where was I to learn them pray? Did you ever before recommend them to me, by either precept or example? Prudence! Economy! What has befallen you? I'm sure there is something wrong, when such words come from your lips. ---Ha! in tears, too! Hovelberg has brought no money then? 


Countess. 
No, no, Barbarian! He has ruined   me. 


Vald. 
How so? 


Countess. 
I cannot tell thee: it would suffocate me. 


   



Jean. 
La, Count! My Lady may well call him Barbarian. He brought the old Baron with him to purchase the jewels, disguised like an Armenian Jew; and when bargaining with her for his own picture, my Lady said something of the original not much to his liking, and so the old fool tore off his disguise and bounced out of the room in a great passion. 


Vald. 
By my faith, this is unlucky! I depended on touching  louis d'ors immediately. 


Countess. 
Thinking only of yourself still, when you may well guess how I am distressed.---I shall never again find such a liberal old cully as he. 


Vald. 
Yes you will, Mother: more readily than I shall find the  louis.---I owe half that sum to Count Pugstoff, for losses at the billiard table; all the velvet and embroidery, the defunct suits of two passing years haunt me wherever I go, in the form of unmannerly taylors: and, besides all this, there is a sweet pretty Arabian in the stables of Huckston, my   jockey, that I am dying to be master of.---By my faith, it is very hard! Had you no suspicion? How came you to be so much off your guard? 


Countess. 
I believe it was fated to be so, and therefore I was blinded for the moment. I dreamt last night that I had but one tooth in my head, and it dropped on the ground at my feet. This, it is said, betokens the loss of a friend by death, and I trembled for thee, my Child; but 

   

now, too surely, my dream is explained and accomplished. 


Vald. 
And, methinks, you would have preferred the first interpretation. 


Countess. 
Ah! ungrateful Boy! You know too well how I have doated on you. 


Vald. 
I do know too well: it has done me little good, I fear. 


Countess. 
It has done me little good, I'm sure, since this is all the gratitude thou hast. I should never, but for thee, have become the flatterer of those I despise, to amass those odious jewels. 


Vald. 
Ha! the jewels are still here then! I shall have my louis' still. Thank you, dear Mother, that you did not part with them, at least. 
Kissing her hand hastily, and running to the table 
  I'll soon dispose of them all. 



Countess. running after him 
No, no! not so fast, Valdemere: thou wilt not take them all. Haste thee, Jeanetta, and save some of them. 

They all scramble round the table for the jewels, and the scene closes. 



   


ACT III. 

Scene  

Scene before the Gate of the Castle. Enter Nina , who crosses the Stage timidly, stopping once or twice, and then, with hesitation, giving a gentle knock at the Gate. Enter Porter from the Gate, which he opens. 




Porter after waiting to hear her speak 
What do you want, young woman? Did you only knock for amusement? 


Nin. 
No, Sir; is Count Valdemere in the castle? I would speak with him, if he is at leisure. 


Port. 
He is in the castle; but as to speaking with him, no man, of less consequence than his valet, can answer that question. 
Enter Lorimore , by the opposite side. 

Here he is. You come opportunely, Mr. Lorimore; this young person would speak with your Master. 



Lor. aside 
O, Nina, I see. 
Aloud 
How do you do, my pretty Nina? You can't speak with my Master, indeed; but you may speak with the next most agreeable personage in these parts, my Master's man, as long as you please; and that, be assured, is a far better thing for your purpose, my Princess. 


   



Nin. 
Dare you insult me? You durst not once have done it.---I do not ask then to see him; but give him this letter. 



Lor. taking the letter 
Do you wish this precious piece to be read, Child, or to be burnt? 


Nin. 
Why ask that? To be read, certainly. 


Lor. 
  I must not give it to the Count, then, but keep it to myself: and if you'll just allow me to make the slight alteration of putting Lorimore the valet for Valdemere the master, as I read, it will be a very pretty, reasonable letter, and one that may advance your honour withal. 


Nin. 
Audacious Coxcomb! Give it me again. 
Snatches the letter from him, and turns away. 


Lor. 
She is as proud as that little devil of a Page, her brother. 

Enter Page behind from the gate. 



Page. 
The more devil he be, the fitter company for you. Whom spoke you to? 
Seeing Nina  
Oh, oh! Is Nina here!---Nina, Nina! 
Running after her. 



Nin. returning 
My dear Theodore, is it thee? I did not ask for thee, lest thou should'st chide me for coming to the castle. 


Page. 
I won't chide, but I'm sorry to see thee here. Fie, Woman! thou art the daughter of as brave an Officer, though a poor one, as any in the service; art thou not ashamed to come, thus meanly, after a lover who despises thee? 


   



Nin. 
He promised to marry me. 


Page. 
He promised a fiddle-stick! Poor deluded simpleton! 


Nin. 
  Ah, dost thou chide me, boy as thou art? 


Page. 
Who is there to chide thee now, when both our parents are dead? But as they would have done so do I, Sister; I chide thee, and love thee too.---Go now; return to the good woman from whose house thou hast stolen away, and I'll buy thee a new gown as soon as my quarter's salary is paid me. 


Nin. 
Silly child, what care I for a new gown? But if thou hast any pity for me, give this letter to thy master. 


Page. 
I will, I will: but go thy ways now; there is a gentleman coming. And do, dear Nina, return no more to the castle till I send thee word. Good be with thee, poor Simpleton! 

 Exit Nina , and enter Dartz by the opposite side. 



Dart. 
Is it thy sister thou hast parted from? I met her in the wood this morning; she need not avoid me now. 


Page. 
Let her go, Sir; the farther she is from the castle the better. 


Dart. 
Thou hast a letter in thy hand. 


Page. 
Yes, Sir. 


Dart. 
Which thou art to give to the Count. 


Page. 
No, Sir; I'll see him choked first. 

                                         Tearing the letter. 


   



Dart. 
  Nay, see what it contains ere thou destroyest it. 



Page. putting it together again and reading it 
Only upbraiding his unkindness, and stuff of that sort, with some nonsense about a dream she has had, which makes her afraid she shall never see him again. 


Dart. 
Let me look. 
After reading it 
This letter may be useful. Come with me, my little friend; and we'll devise a way of revenging thy sister on her cruel seducer. 


Page. 
Will you? I'll worship you like a saint of the calendar if you do this. 



Dart. considering 
Is not your master somewhat superstitious? 


Page. 
Marry is he! but mightily afraid to be thought so. He laughed at me when the bad fever prevailed for wearing a charm on my breast against infection; but the very next night, when he went to bed, what should drop out think you, as he opened his vest, but the very same charm which he had procured immediately, and worn with such secrecy, that even Valet Lorimore knew nothing of the matter. 


Dart. 
This is good; come with me, and I'll instruct thee what to do with thy letter. 

                                         Exeunt. 


   


SCENE II. 

Valdemere 's Dressing-Room: Enter Page treading softly on tiptoe, and looking about the Room. 



Page. 
Aye; the coast is clear, and the door of his chamber is a-jar; now is my time. 
Pulling the torn letter from his pocket, and stamping on the floor as he raises his voice 
There, cursed letter, I'll make an end of thee! Give thee to my master, indeed! I'll give thee to the devil first. 
Pretending to tear the letter, and strew the pieces about, while Valdemere looking from the door of his chamber, steals behind him and seizes his hands with the remainder of the letter in them. 
Mercy on me! is it you, my Lord? 


Vald. 
What art thou doing? What scares thee so? What letter is this? Let me see it. 


Page. 
O no, my Lord, I beseech you, for your own sake, don't read it. 


Vald. 
Why should not I read it, Boy? 


Page. 
Lud, I don't know! you may not mind it, perhaps; but were any body to send such a letter to me, I should be mainly terrified. To be sure, death comes, as they say, at his own time, and we can't keep him away, though we should hang ourselves; but one don't like to be told before-hand the very year or day we are to die, neither. 


Vald. 
The year and day! give me the letter: give it me immediately. 
Snatching the fragments 

   

of the letter from him, and picking up a piece or two from the floor, which he puts together hastily on a table near the front of the stage. 
I can't make it piece any way. 


Page. 
  So much the better, my Lord: don't try to do it. 


Vald. 
It is Nina's hand, I see, but I can make no sense of it.---Aye, now it will do 
reading 
"I have been terrified with a dream, and fear I shall see you no more." But where is the dream; it is torn off; give it me. 


Page. 
I have it not. 


Vald. 
Thou liest! give it me, I say. 


Page. 
Lud have mercy! as I tore it off just now, your black spaniel ran away with it. 


Vald. 
No, varlet! that is a sham; go find it; thou knowest where it is well enough. 


Page. 
Indeed, my Lord, if it is not in the black spaniel's custody it is no where else that I know of. 



Vald. reading again 
I fear I shall see you no more! But it may be her own death as well as mine, that her dream has foretold; and therefore she may see me no more. 


Page. 
Very true, you had better think so; though it does not often happen that a woman is killed at a siege. 


Vald. 
At a siege! 


Page. 
Pest take this hasty tongue of mine; I   could bite it off for the tricks it plays me. 


Vald. 
At a siege! 


Page. 
O, never mind it, Sir. It may be some 

   

lie after all: some wicked invention to make you afraid. 



Vald. sternly 
What sayest thou? 


Page. 
O no! I don't mean afraid; only uneasy as it were---no no! not uneasy neither; only somewhat as you feel at present, my Lord; you know best what to call it. 


Vald. 
At a siege! 


Page. 
Dear my Lord; those words are glued to your tongue. 



Vald. not heeding him 
My grandfather perished at a siege, and his grandfather also: is this fate decreed in our family for alternate generations? 
Sinks into a chair by the table, and Page seeing him so much absorded, comes close to him, staring curiously in his face. 


Vald. 
Take thy varlet's face out of my sight; why art thou so near me? Leave the room, I say. 
                                          Exit Page. 

                                         Rising, and pacing to and fro as he speaks to himself. 
A hundred dreams prove false for one that prefigures any real event.---It should not have been however: my mother should have found for me some other occupation than a military life.---Quit it? No; I can't do that: the   world would cry out upon me; Livia would despise me.---'Tis a strange thing that women, who can't fight themselves, should so eagerly push us to the work.---Pooh! am I a fool that it seizes me thus?---I would this boy, however, had really destroyed the letter. 


   


                                         Enter Dartz , looking at Vald. some time before he speaks. 



Dart. aside 
This will do; it is working with him. 
Aloud, advancing 
My dear Count;---but don't start; I bring no bad tidings; I come to beg a favour of you. 



Vald. recovering himself 
Say you are come to oblige me. 


Dart. 
I thank you, Valdemere: but faith I'm ashamed to mention it; you will laugh at me for being so superstitious. 


Vald. 
Ha! somebody has been dreaming about you too. 


Dart. 
Should you deem me very credulous if a thing of this nature had power to disturb me? 


Vald. 
'Tis even so; they have been dreaming all over the house. Ha, ha, ha! And thou art really uneasy about such flummery as this: ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha! This is admirable---delightful! ---ha, ha, ha, ha! 


Dart. 
Be more moderate with your merriment:   your tears and your laughter come so strangely together, one would take you for an hysterical girl. 


Vald. 
I can't chuse but laugh at your dreamers; ha, ha, ha! 


Dart. 
Don't laugh at me then; for I'm neither a dreamer, nor believer in dreams. 



Vald. becoming serious at once 
No; what is it then? 


Dart. 
I'm almost ashamed to tell you, yet I'll throw myself on your mercy and do it.---I am 

   

in love then, and fearful of the fortunes of war; for you know we must expect sharp fighting this ensuing campaign. 



Vald. ruefully 
You think so? 


Dart. 
I'm certain of it. Now, though I have no faith in dreams, I must own I have some in fortune-tellers; and there is a famous one just come to the castle, whom I would gladly consult. Will you permit me to bring him to your inner apartment there; that he may tell me of my future destiny, whatever his art may reveal to him? Laugh as you please, but refuse me not this favour; for there is no other room in the castle where I can meet him, secure from   interruption. 



Vald. smiling affectedly 
And thou art really in earnest with this folly? 


Dart. 
When you have heard the wonderful things this wizard has foretold, you will not call it folly. 


Vald. 
Can'st thou tell me any of them? 


Dart. 
Take a turn with me on the terrace, and thou shalt hear things that will astonish thee. 


Vald. 
Ha ha! it is whimsical to see thee so serious. Such stories are pleasant amusement: I'll attend thee most willingly. 

                                         Exeunt. 


   


ACT IV. 

SCENE I. 

---A small Room in Valdemere's Apartments; Baron Baurchel is discovered in the Disguise of a Fortune-teller, with Dartz standing by him, adjusting part of his Dress. 



Dart. 
'Twill do well enough. Stand majestically by this great chair, with your worsted robe thrown over the arm of it; it will spread out your figure, and make it more imposing.---Bravo! You assume the astrological dignity to admiration; the rolling of your eyes under that black hood almost appals me. Be as good an astrologer as you have been an Armenian Jew, Baron, and we shall be triumphant. 


Bar. 
As good, Dartz! If I am not a dolt, I shall be better: for there is no danger of losing my temper now; and being fairly engaged in it, methinks I could assume as many shapes as Proteus, to be revenged on this false Hyena and her detestible cub. 


Dart. 
Aye, that is your true spirit. But I must leave you now, and wait in the anti-room for the Count, who will be here presently. 

                                         Exit. 



Bar. after musing some time 
Superlative baseness and ingratitude! That sonnet, of all the sonnets I ever wrote, is the most exquisitely feeling 

   

and tender.---When I read it to her, she wept. ---Were her tears feigned?---I can't believe it. ---Assassins will weep at a high-wrought scene of   tragedy, and cut the author's throat when it is over.---Even so.---It suited her purposes better to laugh at my verses, than acknowledge their genuine effect; and so, forgetting every kindness she owed me,---O the detestable worlding! I'll---Hush, hush, hush! they are coming. 

Re-enter Dartz , followed by Valdemere , who walks shrinkingly behind, peeping past his shoulder to the Baron , who slightly inclines his body, putting his hand with great solemnity three times to his forehead. 




Dart. aside to Vald. after a pause 
Faith, Valdemere, I dare scarcely speak to him; 'tis well you are with me; will you speak to him? 


Vald. 
No; 'tis your own affair; stand to it yourself. 



Dart. aloud 
Learned and gifted Mortal, we come to thee. 



Vald. aside, jogging his arm 
Don't say we --- 'tis your own affair entirely. 


Dart. 
Well, I should say, gifted Sage, not we but I come to thee, to know what fortune is abiding me in this up-and-down world. I am a lover and a soldier, and liable, as both, to great vicissitudes. 


Bar. 
Thou say'st truly, my Son. And who is 

   

this young man so much wiser than thyself, who does not desire to look into futurity? 


Dart. 
It is my friend. 



Bar. after examining the faces of both for some time 
  Say more than friend. 


Dart. 
How so? 



Bar. still continuing to gaze alternately at them 
'Tis very wonderful: in all the years of my occult experience, I never met the like before, but once. 



Vald. aside to Dart.  
What does he mean? Ask him, Man. 


Dart. 
You never met the like but once! What mean you, Father? 



Bar. answers not, but continues to look at them, while Vald. , unable to bear it longer, shrinks again behind Dart.  
Shrink not back, young Man: my eyes make not the fate they see, and cannot do you harm.---'Tis wonderful! There is not in your two faces one trait of resemblance, yet your fortunes in the self-same mould are cast: ye are in fate twin-brothers. 


Dart. 
Indeed! then my friend need only listen to my fortune, and he'll have his own into the bargain. 


Bar. 
Nay, nay, my Sons, be advised, and enquire not into futurity. They are the happiest men, who have fewest dealings with such miserable beings as myself. Beings who are compelled to know the impending evils of hapless humanity, without the power of averting them. Be advised, and suppress unprofitable curiosity. 


   



Dart. 
  By my say, Sage! I cannot suppress it. 


Bar. 
Then let your friend go. He is wise enough not to wish to know his future fate, and I have already said, you are in this twin-brothers. 


Dart. 
Retire then, Valdemere. 



Vald. agitated and irresolute 
I had better, perhaps.---Yet there is within me a strange and perverse craving---I will retire 
going to the door, and stopping short 
. Live in fearful ignorance, fancying evils that may never be! 'Twere better to know all at once. 
Returning. 
Is it our general fortunes only, or is there some particular circumstance of our fate, now present to your mind, of which you advise us to be ignorant? 


Bar. 
There is--- 



Vald. pulling Dart. by the arm 
Come away; come away; don't hear it. 


Dart. 
I am bound by some spell; I must stay to hear it. 


Vald. 
I am certainly bound also; I know not how it is; I must hear it too. 


Baur. 
Be it as you will. 
After writing characters on a table, with other mummeries, 
Propose your questions. 


Dart. 
  The name, age and quality, of her who is my love. 
 Bar. writes again 
The initials of her name I protest, and her age to a day, nineteen years and a half. And her quality, good Father? 


Bar. 
Only daughter and heiress of an eminent Dutch butter-dealer. 


   



Dart. 
Nay, you are scarcely right there, Sage; you might at least have called him Burgo-master. ---But let it pass. She loves me, I hope. 
 Bur. nods. 
I knew it. And now let me know if she shall ever be my wife; and how many children we shall have. 



Vald. aside to Dart.  
Deuce take wife and children too! What is all this drivling for? 



Dart. aside to him 
I thought you were in love as well as myself. 


Vald. 
So I am; but be satisfied that she loves you, and pass on to things of deeper import. 



Dart. aside 
Can any thing be of deeper import? 
Aloud 
I should like very well, gifted Father, to have two or three black-haired burly knaves, and a little fair damsel to play with. 



Vald. aside to Dart.  
Would they were all drowned in a horse-pond! Look how ruefully   the Sage shakes his head at thee: wife or children thou wilt never have. 


Dart. 
Shall I never be married, Father? What shall prevent it? 


Bar. 
Death. 


Dart. 
Shall I lose her? 
Turning to Vald.  
Do you not tremble for Livia? 


Vald. 
Is it her death? Did he say so? Ask him. 


Bar. 
Death will prevent it.---Let me leave you. 



Vald. seizing the Baron 's robe 
Whose death? Whose death? Is it only the Lady's? 


Bar. 
Nay, do not detain me. There is a deep depression on my mind. Good-night to 

   

you! I'll tell you the remainder when you are better prepared to hear it. 


Dart. 
No no! the present time is the best. 



Vald. in a feeble voice 
You had better let him go. 



Dart. catching hold of the Bar.  
You must not leave us in this tremendous uncertainty. Whose death shall prevent my marriage? 


Bar. 
Let me examine, then. Stretch out your hand. 
 Dartz holds out his hand, and Vald. involuntarily does the same, but draws it back again as Bar. begins to inspect it. 
Nay,   don't draw back your hand: I must examine both palms to see if the line of death be there. 


Dart. 
The line of death must be on every man's hand. 


Bar. 
But if it be early or impending death, the waving of the shroud will lie across it. 
 Vald. shudders and turns away his head, and the Bar. , after looking at both their hands, starts back from them, and shakes his head piteously. 


Dart. 
What is the matter, Father? What is the matter? 


Bar. 
Ask not; I will not tell what I know; nothing shall compel me. 

                                          Exit hastily. 



Vald. turning round 
Is he gone? Went he by the door? 


Dart. 
What way he went, I know not. He has vanished I believe: did you hear his steps on the floor? 


Vald. 
I heard nothing. 


   




Dart. after a short pause 
How do you feel, Count? 


Vald. 
Ha! do you feel it too? 


Dart. 
Feel what? 


Vald. 
As if a cold shroud were drawn over you. 


Dart. 
Aye, so I think I do.---But never mind it: we may still have some good months or weeks before us; let us go to the banquet   and put a merry face upon it: a cup of wine will warm us again. What, though my grandam dreamt at my birth that I should be slain in a breach, and the weird witch of Croningberg confirmed it: I'll live and be merry while I may. 


Vald. 
Ha! and thy grandam had such a dream! 


Dart. 
Never mind it: a cup of wine will soon cheer us again. 


Vald. 
Would to God I had one now! 


Dart. 
You have no time to take wine at present: I hear a bustle below; they are going to the grotto already.---Who's at the door? 
Opens the door. 
Your valet with your new suit for the banquet. I'll leave you then. 
 Exit Dartz , and enter Lorimore with a suit of cloaths over his arm, followed by Page . 


Lor. 
I have waited this half hour, my Lord, to hear your bell, and the ladies are waiting for you to go to the grotto. Look at this coat, my Lord: the fashion of it is exquisite, and it has such an air with it; there is not, besides 

   

yourself, a man in the empire that would know how to wear it. 


Page. 
His consummate valet excepted. 


Lor. 
Hold your peace, Sirrah.---Look here,   my Lord; if I had not myself given the tailor a few hints, he could never have had genius enough to finish it in this style. I'd give a ducat that the Marquis De Florimel's valet could see it. He pretends---But you don't look at it, my Lord: what is the matter with you? 



Vald. eagerly 
Is any thing the matter? 


Lor. 
Nothing, my Lord; but the ladies are waiting for you to go with them to the grotto: won't you be pleased to put on your new coat? 


Vald. 
Put it on then. 
Stretching out his arms to put on the coat. 


Lor. 
But we must first take off the old coat. 


Vald. 
I forgot that. 
Trying to pull off his coat. 
It sticks strangely to me: d'off it if thou can'st. 



Lor. after pulling off his coat 
Now, my Lord, thrust your arm into this beautiful sleeve; the whole beau monde of Paris can't shew you its fellow.---That is the wrong arm, my Lord. 


Vald. 
It will do; it will do. 


Lor. 
Pardon me, my Lord; your left arm won't do for the right sleeve of the coat. 



Vald. holding out his other arm, and fumbling some time 
There is no hole at all to put my arm into. 


   



Lor. 
  Nay you push your hand past it; here; here. 


Vald. 
Where sayest thou? 'Tis mightily perplexed. 



Page. aside to himself 
Either the coat or the coat's master is perplexed enough. 
Aloud, offering him his hat 
You won't go, my Lord, without your new hat and plume. 


Vald. 
Plume? 


Page. 
Yes, my Lord, and it will wave so handsomely too, for the company walk by torch-light in procession. 


Vald. 
Let them move on, and I'll follow. 


Page. 
No, they can't go without you, my Lord. 


Vald. 
How is it? Am I one of the pall-bearers? 


Page. 
It is not a funeral, my Lord. 


Vald. 
I forgot; the chillness of the night has bewildered me. 


Lor. 
You are not well, my Lord; what is the matter with you? 


Vald. 
Nothing, leave me alone for a little. 


Lor. 
Will you not join the company? The procession is prepared to set out. 


Vald. 
Aye, very true; tell me when they move the body, and I'll follow it. 


Page. 
  He, he, he! a funeral again. 


Lor. 
Unmannerly imp; what art thou snickering at? 
To Vald. in a loud distinct voice 
It is not a funeral, my Lord. The Lady Livia, and 

   

the Countess your mother, are going to the grotto, and are waiting impatiently below till you join them. 



Vald. rubbing his forehead 
It is so: how went it out of my head? That wine after dinner must have fuddled me. I'll join them immediately. 


Lor. 
Lean on me, my Lord; you are not well, I fear. 


Vald. 
No no! the fumes of that diabolical champaign have left my head now. 


Lor. 
It must have been mixed with some black drug, I think, to produce such a sombre intoxication. 


Page. 
It may rest in the cellar long enough for me; I'll none on't. 


Lor. 
Peace, young Sir; and go before with one of these lights. 

                                          Exeunt , Page lighting them. 

SCENE II. 

An arched Grotto, the Roof and Sides of which are crusted over with Shells and Corals, &c.; a Banquet set out, ornamented with Lamps and Festoons of Flowers. Enter Countess , led in by Dartz , and Livia by Valdemere , two other Ladies by the Baron and Walter Baurchel , Page and Attendants following. 



Liv. 
Welcome all to my sea-nymph's hall; and do me the honour to place yourselves at 

   

table, as best pleases your fancy, without ceremony. ---If you hear any sound without, 'tis but the rolling of forty fathom water over-head; and nothing can intrude on our merriment, but a whale, or a mermaid, or a dolphin. 


Walt. 
This same sea-nymph must have an ingenious art of cultivating roses in the bottom of the ocean. 


Liv. 
It must be a perfect contrivance indeed that escapes the correct taste of Mr. Walter Baurchel. Fruit and ices perhaps may likewise be an incongruity: shall I order them away, and feast you on salt-water and limpits? 


Bar. 
Aye, pickle him up with brine, in a corner by himself; for he has a secret sympathy with every thing uncherishing and pungent. 


Liv. 
Do me the honour to take your places. I can pretty well divine which of the ladies will be your charge, gentle Baron.---But how is this? The Countess and you exchange strange looks, methinks, as if you did not know one another. 


Bar. 
  Some people exchange strange looks, fair Livia, from the opposite cause. 


Liv. 
I don't comprehend you: should you have preferred being in masks? That indeed would have been a less common amusement. 


Bar. 
By no means, Madam; the Countess and I meeting one another unmasked is a very uncommon one. 


Countess. 
You know best, Baron, as far as you 

   

are yourself concerned: you always appeared to me a good and amiable man, and a most tender and elegant poet. 


Bar. 
Of which, Madam, you always took great care to inform me, as a sincere and disinterested friend. 


Liv. 
Ha! what is all this? Poo, poo! take your places together as usual: a love-quarrel never mars merry-making. 


Walt. 
Yes, tender doves! let them smooth down their ruffled feathers by one another as sweetly as they can. Why should you, Madam, give yourself any uneasiness about it.---But the Count, methinks, is less sprightly than usual: there are no more love-quarrels, I hope, in the party. 



Liv. looking at Vald.  
  Indeed you are very silent: I have been too much occupied to observe it before. You don't like my grotto, I fear. 


Vald. 
Pardon me! I like it very well: I like it very much. 


Liv. 
But this is not your usual manner of expressing approbation. 


Vald. 
Is it not? you do me honour to remember it. 
Speaking confusedly as the company sit down to table 
My spirits are very---that is to say, not altogether, but considerably--- 


Dart. 
Low, Valdemere? 



Vald. snatching up a glass and filling a bumper of wine, which he swallows hastily 
No, Dartz; light as a feather. My tongue was so confoundedly 

   

parch'd: this wine is excellent 
drinking another bumper 
. There is more beauty in these decorations than I was aware of: the effect, the taste is incomparable. 
Drinks again. 
It is truly exquisite. 


Walt. 
The champaign you mean, Count? I should have guess'd as much. 


Vald. 
No no; the decorations.---Is it champaign? Let me judge of its flavour more considerately 
drinks again 
; upon honour it is fit   for the table of a god.---But our hostess is a divinity, and 'tis nectar we quaff at her board.--- Wine! common earthly wine! I'll thrust any man thro' with my rapier that says it is but wine. 


Bar. 
Keep your courage for a better cause, Count. Report says the enemy are near us; and you may soon have the honour to exert it in defence of your divinity. 


Walt. 
Which will be a sacred war, you know, and will entitle you, perhaps, to the glory of martyrdom. 


Vald. 
The enemy? 


Walt. 
Aye, report says they are near us. 


Vald. 
Be it so: I shall be prepared for them 
drinks again 
. 



Dart. aside to Walt.  
By my faith, he will be prepared for them, for he'll fill himself mortal drunk, and frustrate our project entirely. 
Aside to Page  
Go, Boy, and bid them make haste: thou understand'st me? 



Page. aside 
Trust me for that: the Philistines shall be upon him immediately. 


   



Countess. 
Valdemere is immeasurably fond of war and of military glory, which the tenderness of a too fearful mother has hitherto with   difficulty restrained; and in your cause, charming Livia, he will be enthusiastically devoted. 


Liv. 
I claim him then as my Knight, whene'er I stand in need of his valorous arms; though it may, perhaps, prove but a troublesome honour. 


Vald. 
It is an honour I would purchase--- aye, purchase with a thousand lives---I say it, divine Livia, with a thousand lives.--- Life!---life!---What is it? but the breath of a moment: I scorn it. 
Getting up from table, and reeling about. 
The enemy did they say? Let an host of them come: this sword shall devour every mother's son of them.---I'm prepared for them all. 



Bar. aside to Dart.  
He is too well prepared; we were foolish to let him drink so much. 



Countess. aside to Vald.  
Be seated again; you disturb the company. 



Vald. still reeling about 
Aye, divine Livia; but the breath of a moment; I scorn it. 

                                         An alarm without: Re-enter Page ; as if much frightened. 


Page. 
O my Lady Livia! O my Master! O gentles all! a party of the enemy is coming to attack the castle, and they'll murder every soul of us. 


Vald. 
Speak plainer, Wretch; what said'st   thou? 


   




Page. speaking loud in his ear 
The enemy are coming to attack the castle. 


Vald. 
Thou liest. 


Page. 
I wish I did; but he will confirm my words. 

                                         Pointing to a Servant who now enters in alarm. 



Ser. to Vald.  
He speaks truth, my Lord; they are approaching in great strength. 


Vald. 
Approaching! are they near us then? 


Page. 
Aye marry! too near. They beat no drum, as you may guess; but the heavy sound of their march strikes from the hollow ground most fearfully. 

                                          Valdemere becoming perfectly sober, stands confounded. 



Liv. and the Ladies , much alarmed 
What shall we do? What will become of us? 


Dart. 
Have courage, Madam; have courage, Ladies; the valiant Valdemere is your defender; you have nothing to fear. 



Liv. and Ladies crowding close to Vald.  
Aye, dear Count; our safety depends on you. Save us! Save us! We have no refuge but you. 
All clamouring at once. 


Vald. 
Hush, hush, hush! They'll hear you. 
In a low choked voice. 


Dart. 
Nay, don't whisper, Valdemere; they are not so near us yet. 


Bar. 
  Rouse ye, Count, and give your orders for the defence of the castle immediately. 


Dart. 
We are ready to execute them, be they ever so daring. 


   



Walt. 
There is no time to be lost; your orders, Count: do you comprehend us? 


Vald. 
My orders! 


Dart. 
Your orders quickly. 


Vald. 
I am thinking---I was thinking--- 



Page. aside. 
How to save yourself I believe. 


Bar. 
Well, noble Count, what are your thoughts. 


Vald. 
I---I---I am considering--- 


Walt. 
Thought and consideration become a good Commander, with some spice of activity into the bargain. 


Dart. 
There is no time to deliberate; issue your orders immediately. Under such an able commander we may stand a siege of some days. 


Vald. 
A siege!---Aye, the very thing---and so suddenly! 


Page. 
You tremble, my Lord; shall I bring you drops? 


Countess. 
Thou liest, Boy; get thee gone!   
Aside to Vald.  
Are you beside yourself? Tell them what to do; they wait for your orders. 


Vald. 
I order them all to the walls. Haste, haste, 
pushing off the Ladies who stand next him 
and man them as well as you can. 


Bar. 
Woman them, you mean, Valdemere; these are Ladies you push. 


Countess. 
Nay; you crowd upon him too much---you confuse him: he is as brave as his sword, if you would leave off confounding him so. 


   



Liv. 
Dear Valdemere! What is the matter? Rouse yourself, rouse yourself! 
A great alarm without. 
Hear that sound: they are at hand; what shall we do? There is a vault by the side of this grotto, where we poor miserable women may be concealed, but--- 



Vald. eagerly 
Where is it? My duty is to take care of you, dear Livia: come, come with me, and I'll place you in security. 
Catches hold of the Page in his hurry, and runs off with him. 


Countess. 
Stop, stop! That is the Page you have got. Will you leave me behind you? 

                                         As Vald. is about to drag the Page into a recess at the side of the stage, the Boy laughs outright, and he discovers his mistake. 


Vald. 
Off, Wretch! Where is Livia; come, come, my Life! where are you? 
Stretching out one hand to her, while his body bends eagerly the other way. 


Liv. 
No, Count; I will not go. Alarm   overcame me for the moment; but now I will enter the castle; and if the enemy should take it, they shall find me there in a situation becoming its Mistress. 


Omnes. 
Bravely said, Lady! Let us all to the castle. 


Dart. 
With or without a commander, we'll defend it to the last extremity. 



Countess. going to Vald. and speaking in his ear, while she pulls him along with her 
Come 

   

with the rest, or be disgraced for ever. Did I put a sword by your side, a cockade in your hat, for this? 

                                         A still louder alarm without, and EXEUNT in great hurry and confusion. 

SCENE III. 

A Grove by the Castle; the Scene darkened, and moving Lights seen through the Trees from the Castle, sometimes gleaming from the Battlements, and sometimes from the Windows: Enter Nina with a Peasant's Surtout over her Dress. 



Nin. 
O, if in this disguise I could but enter the castle! Alas! the company are gone in, and the gate is now shut. I'll wait here till daybreak. ---Woe is me! He past by me quickly, and heard me not when I spoke to him.---O mercy! Soldiers coming here! 
Hides herself amongst some bushes. 

Enter Bounce , followed by Soldiers . 



Bounce. 
Come, let us hector it here awhile: I'll warrant ye we make a noise that might do for the siege of Troy. 


st Sold. 
Aye, you're a book-learned man, Corporal: you're always talking of that there siege. Could they throw a bomb in those days, or fire off an eighteen-pounder any better than ourselves? 

                                         Firing heard without. 


   



Bounce. 
Hark! our Comrades are at it on the other side: let us to it here at the same time. I'll warrant ye we'll make the fair Lady within, and my Lady's fair gentlewomen, and the village Cure himself, should he be of the party, cast up their eyes like boiled fish, and say ten pater-noster's in a breath. 

Voices without. 


                                         Hallo! hallo! Comrades! 
Who goes there? 
Enter d Soldier and others. 



d Sold. 
What makes you so quiet, an' be   hanged to you! An old woman with her spinning-wheel might be stationed here to as much purpose. I could not tell where to find you. 


Bounce. 
By my faith, 'tis the first time Corporal Bounce was ever accused of not making noise enough. Come; we'll give you a round shall make the whole principality tremble. 

                                         They prepare to fire, when d Soldier enters in haste. 


d. Sold. 
Hold, there! Spare your powder for better purpose: an advanced corps of the enemy is coming in good earnest, and marching in haste to the castle. 


Bounce. 
So, we're to have real fighting then! Faith, Comrade, valiant as I am, a little sham thunder, and a good supper after it, would have pleased my humour full as well at this present time. Pest take it! They must open the gates 

   

and let us in. What gentlemen are in the castle? We have no officer to command us. 


d Sold. 
The Chevalier Dartz is there, and Count Valdemere. 


Bounce. 
Ah! he's but a craven-bird, that same Count: a kind of Free-mason-soldier, for parades and processions, and the like. If the young Baron de Bertrand were there, we should be nobly commanded. 


d Sold. 
  Don't stand prating here; let us give the alarm to the rest of our Comrades, and get into the castle ere the enemy come up with us. 


Bounce. 
Come, then! But what moves amongst the bushes? 
Pulling out Nina  
A girl, i'faith, disguised in a countryman's surtout. 


Nin. 
O dear---O mercy! Don't be angry with me: I'm a poor harmless creature. 


Bounce. 
Blessings on thee, pretty One! thou'rt harmless enough: don't think we're afraid of thee. Come away with us: we'll lodge thee safely in the castle. 

                                         Exeunt. 


   


ACT V. 

SCENE I. 

                                         ---A Hall in the Castle: Enter Livia and the Baron , talking as they enter. 


Liv. 
Yes , Baron; you and your friends have, by this plot of yours, taught me a severe lesson; and I thank you for it, though my own understanding ought to have made it unnecessary. 


Bar. 
Dear Livia; why should a young woman like you be so much affronted at finding her understanding---for you are mighty fond of that word understanding ---not quite infallible? At the age of , an age I shall henceforth honestly own I have attained, one is not surprised at some small deficiencies even in one's own understanding. One can then, as I shall henceforth do, give up the vanity of being a wise man. 


Liv. 
And a poet, too, Baron? That were too much to give up in one day. 


Bar. 
Posterity will settle that point, Madam, and I shall give myself very little concern about the matter. 


Liv. 
Which one can easily perceive is perfectly indifferent to you. 
Noise without 
What encreased noise is that? Since your poor victim is already sacrified, for they tell me he is gone, 

   

  on pretence of violent illness, to the vaults under the castle, why continue this mock-war any longer? 

Enter Servant . 



Bar. 
By this man's looks one might suppose that our mockery had turned to earnest. 



Liv. to Serv.  
What is the matter? 


Serv. 
A party of the real enemy, Madam, has come to attack the castle, and is now fighting with the Chevalier's men at the gate. 


Liv. 
Why did you not open the gate to receive the Chevalier's men? 


Serv. 
They called to us to get in; but we could not distinguish them from the enemy, who were close on their heels; so we let down the portcullis, a'nt please you, and they must fight it out under the walls as they can. 


Bar. 
Is the Chevalier in the castle? 


Serv. 
O lud, no, Sir! he sallied out by the postern with Mr. Walter Baurchel and some of the domestics, and is fighting with them like a devil. But his numbers are so small, we fear he must be beaten; and--- 


Liv. 
And how can we hold out with neither men, ammunition, nor provisions. Merciful Heaven deliver us! 

Enter Maid-servants , wringing their hands. 



Maids. 
  O lud, lud! What will become of us? What will become of us? What shall we do? 


   



Bar. 
Any thing you please but stun us with such frantic clamour. Get off to your laundries and your store-rooms, and your dressing closets, and don't encrease the confusion here. 

                                          Exeunt Maids , clamouring and wringing their hands. 


Liv. 
You are rough with those poor creatures; they are very much frightened. 


Bar. 
Not half so frightened as those who make less noise. They think it necessary to raise an out-cry, because they are women and it is expected from them. I have been long enough duped in this way; I have no patience with it now.---But I must go to the walls and try to be of use 
going 
. 

Voice without 
Succour! Succour! 


Liv. 
Ha! there is a welcome cry. 

Enter Jeanetta . 

Succour did they say? 


Jean. 
Yes, my Lady: a band of men come to relieve us; and their leader is charging the enemy so furiosly sword in hand!---the Chevalier, they said, fought like a devil; but he fights like forty devils. We have been looking down upon them by torch-light from the walls; and their swords flash, and their plumes nod, and   their eyes glare in the light so gallantly, I could almost sally out myself and take a bout with them. 



Bar. to Jean.  
Aye, Minx; thou'rt forward enough to do any thing. 


   



Liv. 
Nay, chide her not when she brings us good news.---Heaven be praised for this timely aid! What brave man has brought it to us? Dost thou know him, Jeanetta? 


Jean. 
No, Madam: for, thank God! his back is to us, and his face to the foe; but there is a smack in his air of the Baron de Bertrand. 


Bar. 
Ha! my brave Antonio! I'll be sworn it is he. Come; let us to the ramparts, and look down on the combatants. 


Liv. 
Heaven grant there be not much bloodshed! 

                                         Exeunt. 

SCENE II. 

A dark Vault: Enter Valdemere , followed by Page , carrying a torch in one hand, and his plumed Cap in the other. 




Vald. after hurrying some paces onward, stops short, and looks wildly round him 
Is there no passage this way? 


Page. 
No, my Lord; but you run marvellously fast for one so ill as you are: I could scarcely keep up with you: pray stop here awhile and take breath. 


Vald. 
Stop here, and that sound still behind me! 


Page. 
What sound? 


Vald. 
Did'st thou not hear the tread of heavy steps behind us? The trampling of a whole band? 


   



Page. 
It was but the sound of my feet following you. 


Vald. 
Only that. The castle is taken thou say'st, and the ruffians are in quest of me. 


Page. 
Aye, marry are they! Their savage leader says, as the old tale-book has it, that he'll have the heart's blood of Count Valdemere on his sword before he eat or sleep. 


Vald. 
His sword! 


Page. 
Aye, my Lord, a good heavy rapier I assure you; and he swears, since you have not fought like a man on the walls, he'll kill you   like a rat in your hole. 


Vald. 
I am horribly beset! 


Page. 
Aye, hot work, my Lord; the big drops fall from your forehead, like a thunder shower. 


Vald. 
Thou liest; I am cold as the damp of a sepulchre. 


Page. 
And pale too, as the thing that lies within it. 



Vald. listening 
Hark, hark! they are coming. 


Page. 
I hear nothing. 


Vald. 
Thou dost! thou dost! lying Varlet, with that treacherous leer upon thy face: thou hast decoyed me here for destruction. 
Catching him by the throat. 


Page. 
For mercy, my Lord, let go your hold! I hear nothing, as I hope to be saved, but our own voices sounding again from the vaulted roof over our heads. 


   



Vald. 
Aye, it is vaulted; thou'rt right perhaps. ---This strange ringing in my ears will not suffer me to know the sounds that really are, from those are not.---Why dost thou grin so? I have a frenzy I believe; I know I am strangely disordered. It was not so with me yesterday. I could then---Dost thou grin still? Stand   some paces off: why art thou always so near me? 



Page. retiring to the opposite side of the stage 
I had best perhaps: his hand has the gripe of a madman. 



Vald. leans his back against the side-scene, pressing his temples tightly with both hands, and speaking low to himself 
This horrible tumult of nature! it knows within itself the moments that precede its destruction. 


Page. 
I must let him rest for a time. 
Pause. 
---It is cold here doing nothing. 
Puts on his cap. 
---He moves not: his eyes have a fixed ghastly stare; truly he is ill. 
Going up to him. 
You are very ill, my Lord. 



Vald. starting 
Have mercy upon me! 


Page. 
Don't start, my Lord; it was I who spoke to you. 


Vald. 
Who art thou? 


Page. 
Your Page, my Lord. 


Vald. 
Ha! only thou! thy stature seemed gigantic. 


Page. 
This half-yard of plume in my cap, and your good fancy have made it so. 


   



Vald. 
Aye; thou wert unbonnetted before. Keep by me then, but don't speak to me. 
Putting his hand again to his temples. 


Page. 
Nay, I must ask what is the matter. You are very ill: what is the matter with   you? 


Vald. 
There is a beating within me like the pendulum of a great clock. 


Page. 
Is it in your heart or your head, my Lord? 


Vald. 
Don't speak to me: it is every where. 


Page. 
Rest here a-while; they will not discover you. You are indeed very ill.---Are you worse? 


Vald. 
Speak not; my mouth is parched like a cinder; I can't answer thee. 


Page. 
I'll fetch you some water. 
Going. 



Vald. springing across the stage after him 
Not for the universe. 



Page. aside 
He's strong enough still I see. 
Turning his ear to the entry of the vault. 


Vald. 
Thou'rt listening; thou hear'st something. 


Page. 
By my faith they are coming now. 


Vald. 
Merciful heaven! where shall I run? 


Page. 
Where you please, my Lord. 



Vald. hurrying two or three steps on, in a kind of groping way 
The light fails me: I don't see where I am going. 


Page. 
Nay it burns very clearly; I fear it will discover where we are. 


Vald. 
Put it out! put it out for God's sake! 

   

---Where is it? 
Seizes on the torch, puts it out stamping on it with his feet, then laying himself on the floor 
  I am gone---I am dead; tell them so for God's sake! 


Page. 
I shall tell but half a lie when I do. 

Enter Baron and Walter Baurchel with Soldier's Cloaks thrown over them, and Livia in the same Disguise with a military Cap drawn over her Eyes, a Servant preceding them with Torches. 




Liv. shrinking back as she enters 
Is he dead? 

 Page nods, and winks to her significantly. 




Bar. in a rough voice 
Has the Caitiff escaped my sword? Have I thirsted for his blood in vain? 



Walt. in a rough voice also 
Is he really dead? I'll lay my hand on his breast, and feel if his heart beats. 


Page. 
O don't do that, gracious merciful Sir! You'll but defile your worshipful fingers in touching of a dead corse, which brings bad luck with it. 


Walt. 
Well then, Boy, I will not; but there are a couple of brawny knaves without, who are burying the dead for us; they shall come forthwith, and cast him into the pit with the rest. 


Page. 
O lud, no, Sir! don't do that, please your worshipful Goodness! What if he should come alive again? 


Walt. 
Never fear that: I'll draw this rapier cross his laced cravat, and make it secure. 



Vald. starting up upon his knees 
Mercy, 

   

mercy! slay not a dying man; let me breathe my last breath without violence. 



Liv. covering her eyes, and turning away her head 
  Torment him no more, I beseech you! 

Enter Antonio , and Dartz with his arm bound up. 



Ant. 
Nay, Gentlemen, this is unfeeling, ungenerous, unmanly. Stand upon your feet, Count Valdemere 
raising him up, 
there are none but friends near you, if friends they may be called, who have played you such an abominable trick. 


Vald. 
How is this? Art thou Antonio? Where are those who would have butcher'd me? 

Omnes, Liv. and Ant. excepted . 
Ha, ha, ha! 
laughing some time. 


Bar. 
No where, Valdemere, but in your own imagination. We have put this deceit upon you to cure you of arrogance and boasting. 


Walt. 
Running the usual risk, gentle Count, of not having our services very thankfully acknowledged. 


Vald. 
You have laid a diabolical snare for me, and I have fallen into it most wretchedly.---I have been strangely overcome. I have been moved as with magic.---I have been---I ---I know not---What shall I call it? 


Walt. 
Give yourself no trouble about that, Count; we can find a name for it. 


Ant. 
Nay, good Sir; you shall not call it by any name a man would be asham--- 
correcting 

   

himself 
  unwilling to hear. The Count, as Dartz has informed me, while I bound up his wound above stairs, has been tampered with, by dreams and fortune-telling and other devices, in a way that might have overcome many a man, who, differently circumstanced, would not have shrunk from his duty in the field. And shall we sport wantonly with a weakness of our nature in some degree common to all? We admire a brave man for overcoming it, and should pity the less brave when it overcomes him. 



Liv. catching his hand eagerly 
Noble Antonio! 


Ant. 
Young man, I thank you: this squeeze of the hand tells me I have you upon my side. 


Vald. 
And let me also say, "Noble Antonio!" ---And what more can I say! I have not deserved this generous treatment from you. 


Ant. 
Say nothing more: the transactions of this night shall be as if they had never been: they will never be mentioned by any of us. 


Walt. 
Speak for yourself, Antonio De Bertrand; my tongue is a free agent, and will not be bridled by another person's feelings. But there is one condition on which I consent to be silent as the grave; and the Baron and Chevalier   concur with me. 


 Bar. and Dartz . 
We do so. 

                                         Exit Bar. 


Dart. 
We but require of Valdemere to do what, as a man of honour he is bound to do; and satisfied on this point, our silence is secured for ever. 


   

Re-enter Bar. leading in Nina . 




Bar. to Vald.  
Look on this fair gentlewoman: her father was a respectable officer, though misfortunes prevented his promotion. You have taken advantage of her situation, being under the protection of the Countess your mother, as a God-daughter and distant relation, to use her most unworthily. Make her your wife, and receive, as her dowry, your reputation in the world untarnished. 


Walt. 
Now, good, heroic, sentimental Antonio; is this too much to require of the noble personage you plead for? 


Ant. 
On this I am compelled to be silent. 


Bar. 
Will Count Valdemere vouchsafe us an answer? Will you marry her or not, Count? 


Vald. 
I have indeed---I ought in strict justice ---She will not accept of one who has used her so unworthily. 



Page. eagerly 
I hope not: I would rather   than a thousand crowns she would refuse him. 


Dart. 
Will you have him or not, pretty Nina? Don't be afraid to refuse him: we shan't think the worse of you if you do. 
 Nina stands silent and weeping. 



Page. aside to Nina  
Don't have him, Woman; he's a coward and a coxcomb, and a--- don't have him. 



Nina. aside 
Ah, you have never loved him as I have done, Brother. 


   




Page. aloud 
Murrain take thee and thy love too! thou hast no more spirit in thee than a worm. 


Bar. 
Bravo, Boy! thou hast enough of it, I see; and I'll put a stand of colours in thy hand as soon as thou art strong enough to carry them. Thou art my boy now; I will protect thee. 


Page. 
I thank you, Baron.---And my sister; will you protect her too? 


Bar. 
Yes, Child; both of you. 


Page. 
Refuse him then, Nina: hast thou no more pride about thee? 


Nina. 
Alas! I should have more pride: I know I should; but I have been sadly humbled. 


Page. 
Thou'lt be still more so if thou art his wife, trust me! for he'll despise thee, and cow thee, and make thee a poor slave to his will.   Thou'lt tremble at every glance of his eye, and every turn of his humoursome fancy.---He'll treat thee like a very--- 


Vald. 
Stop, spiteful Wretch! I'll cherish and protect her, and turn every word thou hast uttered to a manifest and abominable falsehood. ---Give me thy hand, Nina; thou really lovest me; no one will do it but thee; and I shall have need of somebody to love me. 


Omnes. 
Well said, Count! this is done like a man! 



Ant. to Page  
Faith, Boy! those sharp words of thine were worth a store of gentle persuasion. Thou hast woo'd for thy sister in a spell-like fashion as witches say their prayers backwards. I wish somebody would court my mistress for 

   

me in the same manner: 'tis the only chance have of winning her. 



Liv. in a feigned voice 
I'll do that for thee, gallant De Bertrand; for I know faults enough of yours to acquaint her with, besides the greatest of all faults, concealing good talents under a bushel; every tittle of which I will tell her forthwith, and she'll marry you, no doubt, out of spite. 


Ant. 
  Thanks, pleasant Stripling! May thy success be equal to thy zeal! 
Taking her hand 
Thy name, Youth: thou hast a pretty gait in that warlike cloak of thine, but thy cap overshadows thee perversely.---Ha! this is not a boy's hand!---That ring---O Heavens! 

                                         Retires some paces back in confusion, while Livia , taking off her cap and cloak, makes him a profound curtesey; and pauses, expecting him to speak. Finding him silent, she begins to rub her hand, and look at it affectedly. 


Liv. 
It is not a boy's hand, Baron de Bertrand: 'tis the hand of a weak foolish woman, which shall be given to a lover of hers who is not much wiser than herself, whenever he has courage to ask it. 



Walt. aside, jogging Ant.  
That is thyself: dost thou not apprehend her, Man? 



Liv. still looking at her hand 
Even so; whenever he has courage to ask it. That, I suppose, may happen in about five or six years from this present time. 


   




Ant. running up to her, catching her hand, and putting his knee to the ground 
Now, now, dear Livia! O that I could utter what I feel! ---I am a fool still;---I cannot. 


Liv. 
Nothing you can possibly say will make me more sensible of your generous worth, or more ashamed of my former injustice to it. 

                                         All crowd round Ant. and Liv. to congratulate them, when the Countess is heard speaking angrily without. 


Dart. 
We must pay our compliments another time; I fear there is a storm ready to burst   upon us. 

Enter Countess . 



Countess. 
Yes, Gentlemen; I have heard of your plot, as you call it; a diabolical conspiracy for debasing the merit you envy. I despise you all: you are beneath my anger. 


Walt. 
Let us escape it then. 



Countess. to Walt.  
Aye, snarling Cynic! who hast always a prick of thy adder's tongue to bestow upon every one whom the world admires or caresses; thou art the wicked mover of all these contrivances. 
To the Bar.  
As for you, poor antiquated Rhime-maker ! had I but continued to praise your verses, you would have suffered me to ruin your whole kindred very quietly; nor had one single grain of compunction disturbed the sweet calm of your gratified vanity. 


Bar. 
Nay, Madam; I cannot charge my memory with any interruption of your goodness, 

   

in this respect, to my face: had you been as perseveringly obliging behind my back, we might indeed have remained longer friends than would have been entirely for the interests of my heir. 


Countess. 
Well, well; may every urchin of the principality learn by rote some scrap of your   poetry, and mouth it at you as often as you stir abroad! 
To Liv.  
And you, Madam; you are here, too, amongst this worshipful divan! This is your hospitality---your delicacy---your--- O! may you wed a tyrant for your pains, and these walls prove your odious prison!---But I spend my words vainly: where is the unhappy victim of your envious malevolence? They told me he was here. 
Discovering Vald. and Nina retired to the bottom of the stage 
Ha! you are here, patiently enduring their triumph, degenerate Boy! Is this the fruit of all my cares? Did I procure for you a military appointment, did I tease every creature connected with me for your promotion, did I ruin myself for your extravagant martial equipments---and has it all come to this? 


Vald. 
You put me into the army, Madam, to please your own vanity; and they who thrust their sons into it for that purpose, are not always gratified. 


Countess. 
And you answer me thus! I have spoilt you, indeed; and an indulged child, I find, does not always prove a dutiful one. Who is that you hold by the hand? 


   



Vald. 
  My wife, Madam. 


Countess. 
Your wife! You do not say so: you dare not say so. Have they imposed a wife upon you also? Let go her unworthy hand. 


Vald. 
No, Madam; never. It is my hand that is unworthy to hold so much innocent affection. 


Countess. 
You are distracted: let go her hand, or I renounce you for ever.---What, will you not? 


Vald. 
I will not. 


Countess. 
Thou can'st be sturdy, I find, only for thine own ruin. They have confounded and bewildered thee: thou hast joined the conspiracy against thyself, and thy poor mother.--- O, I could hate thee more than them all!--- Heaven grant me patience! 


Walt. 
I like to hear people pray for what they really want. 


Countess. 
Insolent! Heaven grant you what you need not pray for, the detestation of every one annoyed with your pestiferous society. 

                                          Exit in rage. 


Dart. 
Let us be thankful this tornado is over, and the hurry of an eventful day and night so happily concluded.---I hope, charming Livia,   you forgive our deceit, and regret not its consequences. 


Liv. 
The only thing to be regretted, Chevalier, is the wound you have received. 


Dart. 
Thank God! this, though but slight, is the only harm that has been done to-night, 

   

a broken pate or two excepted; and our feigned attack upon the castle has been providentially the means of defending it from a real one. Had not Antonio, however, who was not in our plot, come so opportunely to our aid, we had been beaten.---But now that I have time to enquire, how did'st thou come so opportunely? 


Ant. 
I have been in the habit of wandering after dark round the walls. Livia knows not how many nights I have watched the light gleaming from the window of her chamber. Wandering then, as usual, I discovered a corps of the enemy on their march to the castle, and went immediately for succour, which I fortunately found. We have both fought stoutly, my Friend, with our little force; but the blows have fallen to your share, and the blessing to mine. 


Dart. 
Not so; friends keep not their shares so distinctly. 


Liv. 
  True, Chevalier; and you claim, besides, whatever satisfaction you may have from the gratitude of this good company, for contriving a plot that has ended so fortunately. 


Dart. 
Nay, there is, I fear, one person in this good company, from whom my claims, of this kind, are but small.---Count Valdemere, can you forgive me? 


Vald. 
Ask me not at present, Dartz. I know that my conduct to Antonio did deserve correction; but you have taken a revenge for him with merciless severity, which he would 

   

himself have been too generous, too noble to have taken. 


Dart. 
Well, Count, I confess I stand somewhat reproved and conscience-stricken before you. 



Walt. to Dart.  
Why, truly, if he forgive thee, or any of us, by this day twelve-month, it will be as much as we can reasonably expect. 


Dart. 
Be it so! And now we have all pardon to ask, where, I hope, it will be granted immediately. 
Bowing to the audience. 

Back matter 

THE END.


 
 

NOTES
^ List of speakers 
BAR. AND DARTZ.
ST SOLD
D SOLD
D SOLD
D. SOLD
ANT
BAR
BARON
BAUR
BOUNCE
COUNTESS
DART
HOV
JEAN
LIV
LOR
MAIDS
NIN
NINA
OMNES
PAGE
PORT
PORTER
SER
SERV
VALD
WALT

____________________________________________________________



Full text: THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY. IN FIVE ACTS.
 
Front matter
ADVERTISEMENT. The following Play was written when Master Betty, known by the name of the Young Roscius, was in the highest favour with the public, and before I had seen him perform; but, upon after consideration, was not offered to the theatre. It appears to me, in reading it again, after a long lapse of years, to be a Play not ill suited to a very young actor, at the beginning of his career; being in prose, and having, I hope, no false, overstrained passion in it, to mislead him into ranting or exaggerated expression, either as to gesture, voice, or face.
Were there more characters of simple nature, adapted to young actors, to be found in our dramatic stores, they would not at first acquire those bad habits which so often prevent their after excellence. And the public would, in this early stage of their progress, receive from them a rational entertainment; for, surely, to see a boy assuming the warlike air and tormenting jealousy of Othello, or the delicate and complicated feelings of the Prince of Denmark, scarcely deserves that name.

 
The story of the Play is in some measure taken from a melancholy event which took place many years ago in Glasgow, yet still within the recollection of some of its present inhabitants. A young man, whose father was in prison, and about to be tried for a capital offence,—his fate depending on the single evidence of one person, which it was believed must prove fatal,—fired through a window at night, and killed the dreaded witness. The father's life was by this means spared, and the son was executed for the criminal act, though it was perpetrated from the strongest feeling of filial affection, being himself in no degree implicated in the guilt of his father.


 
 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Arden.
Young Arden.
Robinair.
Bruton.
Humphry , an old Servant in the Family of Arden.
Morgan , Servant.
Robert , Servant.
Gaolers, Servants, Countrymen, &c.
WOMEN. Mrs. Arden.
Madaline.
Scene, in London and the Vicinity.
 
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. — Arden's House; Mrs. Arden discovered in a disconsolate posture, with Madaline hanging over her soothingly. MADALINE. Be not so overcome, my dear cousin; he has friends who will exert all their interest on his behalf.
MRS. ARDEN. Ay, ay! thou talkest like a child who believes every one as sincere and affectionate as herself. Who are they who interest themselves for the unfortunate? They who have daily conversed with him, laughed with him, gamed with him? who have daily quaffed wine at his table, and repeated every pleasantry that fell from his lips? Shaking her head with an expression of bitter contempt. My husband had many such friends!

 
MADALINE. But you think too hardly of mankind: some one, even amongst them, will be found to stand up in his defence now in his hour of need. Robinair, for instance; he will bestir himself vigorously. He is in credit with people in power: he has always been warm in his expressions of friendship, I may say of admiration, for Mr. Arden. He will find means to influence them in his favour.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas, alas! does our hope hang on this point? I fear, indeed, that he has too much committed himself to this man: he hinted to me something of the kind, which, more than any other unfavourable    circumstance, makes me tremble.
MADALINE. Why, how is this? I thought Robinair had been your friend, too. I have always understood, though I was then too young to be admitted into your confidence, that he was attached to you before you married. And has he not, ever since his return from abroad, befriended your husband in all the embarrassments into which his imprudence has thrown him?
MRS. ARDEN. Rather say that, in the bitterness of disappointment,
 
he has haunted us like a malevolent spirit, to enjoy our misfortunes and distress.
MADALINE. Can he be so wicked?
MRS. ARDEN. Without being able directly to accuse him of one unfriendly office, something within my breast has always whispered this to me. But Arden, my poor Arden, thought otherwise; and it was the only thing that ever caused disagreement between us. I enjoyed the confidence of my husband till he became so intimate with him, and from that time I have been kept in the dark regarding all his schemes and transactions. Judge, then, with what heart I shall put my trust in Robinair!
MADALINE. Try him, however: put his friendship to the    proof.
MRS. ARDEN. I mean to do so, Madaline: I have already sent to him, and expect him every moment. Listening. Is there not somebody coming?— A heavy footstep—his step! Now must I hold down this proud heart within me, and be supplicant to him whom I despise.

 
Enter Bruton . Mr. Bruton! I expected, Sir, to have seen your friend.
BRUTON. Unavoidable business, Madam, prevents Mr. Robinair from waiting upon you: he cannot possibly come to this part of the town to-day; but he will be happy to have the honour of receiving you, at his own house, any hour in the forenoon which you may be pleased to appoint.
MRS. ARDEN. He says so? A pause. I ought not to be surprised at this message.—I shall wait upon him at half-past twelve. Perhaps I shall find more generosity in his nature than this message, or the misgivings of my own heart, seem to promise. Looking earnestly at Bruton . You are silent, Mr. Bruton: you make no rash promises for your friend.
BRUTON. I hope, Madam, you will not be disappointed in any good opinion you may form of him.    I hope he will make every exertion in favour of Mr. Arden; but, in cases of this nature, all applications to royal benevolence, unless under very peculiar circumstances, have proved unsuccessful.

 
MRS. ARDEN. Alas! I know that forgery is a crime which, in a commercial country, is rigorously dealt with; and if Arden is once condemned, notwithstanding his innocence, I shall be hopeless. It is the services of a friend regarding the evidence to be produced upon his trial that I would solicit from Mr. Robinair. No one is so capable as himself of rendering them effectually.
BRUTON. He is, indeed, active, sagacious, and acute. Muttering words indistinctly.
MRS. ARDEN. Yes, he has all the qualities you have named. —Half-past twelve, then, you think he will be at leisure?
BRUTON. Yes, Madam: good morning. Going.
MRS. ARDEN. Mr. Bruton! Calling after him.
BRUTON. Did you call me, Madam?
MRS. ARDEN. I beg pardon—there is nothing: good morning.

 
BRUTON. Good morning, Lady. Going as before, till almost off the Stage.
MRS. ARDEN stepping after him hastily. Mr. Bruton! forgive this irresolute weakness: I did call you. Oh, Sir! the wretched hope for succour where no claims exist,—even from the    stranger and the unknown; and think that every look of pity comes from one who would befriend them. There was an expression on your face as you went; have I read it truly? Will you use your influence with Robinair for the unhappy? Although, I acknowledge, the sentiments I have felt and, perhaps, too strongly expressed for all those who, with Robinair, seemed engaged in drawing my husband into expensive and dangerous habits, do not entitle me to ask any favour of you .
BRUTON. Be assured, Madam, no remembrance of such expressions shall rest upon my mind at present; and if it is possible to be of any use to you, I will. Would to God I could serve you!
MRS. ARDEN. You can—you can! You can move him.
BRUTON. Move him!—I will try to do it; but, if he is
 
to be moved, who can do it so powerfully as yourself? My best wishes are on your side.
                                         Exit. MRS. ARDEN. “Move him!”—“if he is to be moved!” Didst thou mark with what a voice he uttered those words?
MADALINE. Nay, do not despair.
MRS. ARDEN. He knows the man. Oh, my unfortunate husband! And my son—my boy, my pride—    must thou be the son of a condemned— Bursting into tears.
MADALINE. Do not bewail yourself thus, as if the worst had already befallen you. The storm will pass: the innocent will never be condemned, how strong soever the circumstances may be which make him at present suspected. And for your son, so far distant at school, he will know nothing of this terrible distress. How fortunate it is, poor boy, that he is absent! His affectionate and sensible heart would ill support itself against the dreadful shock.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas, poor fellow! he is conning over his daily tasks, and sporting with his careless playmates,
 
and little dreams of the misery at home. O that he may never know it! Thank Heaven, however, that he is at present removed from it.
MADALINE. It is one fortunate circumstance amidst your many distresses. Do not suffer yourself to be so depressed; wrestle more bravely with your misfortunes, and Heaven will support and protect you.
MRS. ARDEN. I will try to do so.
MADALINE. This is well said: and, if I might advise you, retire for an hour to your chamber, and, if possible, take a little rest. You have been up the    whole night, and it is still early in the morning. You will not else have strength to comfort him who so much wants your comfort.
MRS. ARDEN. I thank you, my kind Madaline; I will do as you desire me, though nowhere is there any rest for me.
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE II. An Ante-room. Enter Humphry and Robert , meeting. ROBERT. Art thou from the prison, Humphry?
HUMPHRY. Yes.
ROBERT. Hast thou seen our Master?
HUMPHRY. Yes.
ROBERT. Is he on the felon's side?
HUMPHRY angrily. Yes.
ROBERT. Be there irons upon his legs?
HUMPHRY pushing him away. No, beast; but I wish there were upon thy tongue.

 
ROBERT. What makes you growl so at a body? Is there any harm in axing a question or two? for I wants hugely to know how he looks, and how he demeans himself upon it.
HUMPHRY. He demeans himself like a man; and how he looks, those may say who have courage enough to look at him. I saw no part of him higher than his waist.
ROBERT. Ah, poor gentleman! he was a good master to us, I must say that for him; and had it not been for those sharking fellows hanging about him so, eating up his substance through the day, and leading him to the gaming-house at night, he would have remained so, living in credit and honesty. His lady, poor woman! my heart    grieves for her; and that fine lad, our young master, what will become of him?
HUMPHRY. Ay, generous boy! kindly boy! noble boy! it will pull hard at his high spirit, I warrant ye. He will be fifteen next Monday; and what a joyless birthday it will be!
ROBERT. Yes, man: he is so courteous and so gentle with us here; and yet they say at school, amongst
 
his playfellows, he is the master boy of them all, and reigns over them as bravely as any prince.
HUMPHRY. Ay; woe is me for him!
ROBERT. It is well, howsomever, that he knows nothing of it at present. Evil comes soon enough, God wot.
HUMPHRY. Is my lady in her chamber?
ROBERT. I thought I heard a noise as if she were. Both draw close to the side scene to listen. They told me she was gone to lay down; but she may be stirring now.
Enter Young Arden by the opposite side. YOUNG ARDEN aside. Ha! there's old Humphry and Robert confabbing together. I am taller since I left home, and they have never seen me in a coat of this fashion: I think I may play them a trick. Pulling his hat over his eyes, and speaking in a feigned voice. Pray, ye good Sirs, is young Mr. Arden at home?
HUMPHRY.    No, Sir; have you any business with him? He's at school.

 
YOUNG ARDEN. And he had better stay there, I trow, if he has not a mind for as sound a beating as ever fell to the share of a sorry jackanapes.
HUMPHRY. Sorry jackanapes, Sir! There is not a braver boy in the kingdom. He would think no more of chucking such a sneaking fellow as you into the kennel than I should of twisting round this junk of tobacco.
YOUNG ARDEN. Yes, to be sure, it becomes you to speak well of him, for the honour of the house you are in; but you know well enough that he is but a paltry fellow, who runs about the house and calls out “O dear!” if his finger be but scratched, that every body may pity him.
HUMPHRY. He is ready enough to pity any body; but scratch his own finger to the bone, ay, cut off his leg, an you please, and the devil himself will not make him call out “O dear!”
YOUNG ARDEN casting away his hat, skipping across the room, and throwing his arms round Humphry's neck. My dear Humphry! my kind old Humphry! thou lovest me as much as ever, I see; and I
 
might ride on thy shoulders still, were I not somewhat heavier now, and thou scarcely so strong. We have had happy days together,    Humphry! and we'll have them again, though after a different fashion.
HUMPHRY. Ah, my dear child! what has brought you here?
YOUNG ARDEN. Our school has broke up suddenly, on account of a fever that has got into it. I thought I should come upon you by surprise. But how is this? You look strangely upon me.—And you too, Robert: are you not glad to see me? A pause. What is the matter? Is my father within?
HUMPHRY making signs for Robert to be silent. No, he is not within—or, rather, he is not at home—or, that is to say, he has left his own house for a little time.
YOUNG ARDEN. And my mother, is she well?
HUMPHRY. Pretty well—so so.
YOUNG ARDEN. So so! Where is she?
HUMPHRY. Taking a short rest, I believe, in her own
 
room. Preventing Young Arden , who is hastening towards the door. Nay! let her rest a little while before you go to her; and wait meantime in the library, where you will have books to amuse you.
YOUNG ARDEN. Be it so, then; but I cannot wait long. I want only to look upon her, but not to wake or    disturb her.
                                         Exit. HUMPHRY. How tall he has grown! he has the size of a man, and I'm sure he had always the spirit of one. Oh, how it will be put to the proof!
ROBERT. It makes a body quake to think of it. His own father to die the death of a—
HUMPHRY. I'll throttle thee if thou say another word about that!
ROBERT. Lord 'a mercy! one may not speak to you now about any thing that one cares most to speak about.
                                         Exeunt severally.
 
SCENE III. Mrs. Arden's Bed-chamber. She is discovered lying on a couch, as if asleep, with a shawl thrown over her face. Enter Young Arden , stepping softly on tiptoe. YOUNG ARDEN. Is she asleep? Her breast heaves under that covering, as if she slept soundly. Going up to her. All covered up so closely! Ha! here is a hand peeping out which I will press by and by right dearly. Kneels, and bends over her hand, mimicking the action of kissing, but without touching it. I can see her features, too, through these folds. Putting his face close to hers, affectionately. How surprised she will be when she wakes, and sees me by her! Does she not move? She is awake. Lifting the shawl gently from her face. Mother! my little dormouse mother!
MRS. ARDEN shrieking, and starting up. Good God! art thou here, Edmond? Why art thou come? What brings thee? Hast thou heard any thing?
YOUNG ARDEN. Heard any thing? What should I hear? Has
 
any thing happened? Where is my father? They tell me he has gone from home for a short time: where is he gone?
MRS. ARDEN. Yes, yes; he is gone from home. This house is not his home at present. Bursting into tears and falling on his neck.
YOUNG ARDEN. My dearest mother! why this excess of grief? Where is he gone to? For God's sake! where is he gone to?
MRS. ARDEN.    He is gone—they have put him—he is gone—
YOUNG ARDEN. To prison?
MRS. ARDEN. Even so, boy! thou hast guessed it. But, oh, think not hardly of him! He has been misled; he has been imprudent.
YOUNG ARDEN. Think hardly of him, mother! I would not think hardly of him, though I were turned to the streets for his sake, and left to beg my bread from door to door.
MRS. ARDEN. Oh, my child! what hast thou to go through!

 
YOUNG ARDEN. Think not of me, dear mother; I can go through it all with a good heart.—But what will become of you till I am old enough to work for you?—Fie on't! I am old enough now: I am sound of life and limb, and I have spirit enough to face anything.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas, alas for thee!
YOUNG ARDEN. Fear not, fear not. I am a proud boy, it is true; but I will not be ashamed before any one when I am working for my mother.
MRS. ARDEN. My blessed child! and must this be thy portion?
YOUNG ARDEN. Yes, Madam, and an honourable one too. Cheer up, cheer up, my dear mother. I shall go    to my father presently, and meet him with such a cheerful countenance, that he shall only wait for a discharge from his creditors, which they cannot refuse when he has given up all that he has,— to be a far happier man than he was before.
MRS. ARDEN. Oh! oh! thou little thinkest what thou hast before thee!

 
YOUNG ARDEN. Nay, say not “Oh! oh!” I have looked forward to this for some time, and have hardened myself to meet it. I saw well enough, schoolboy as I was, what the gaming-table and his numberless expenses would lead him to.
MRS. ARDEN. And didst thou think of him thus?
YOUNG ARDEN. Yes, I did, mother; but I loved him, nevertheless, and will love him still.—Be composed, then, I beseech you, and let me run to him immediately.
MRS. ARDEN holding him. Not now, not now! Stay with me, and tell me why thou hast come to us so unexpectedly.
YOUNG ARDEN. That can soon be told.—But here is Madaline. Well, cousin; you are come to welcome me? Holding out his hand.
Enter Madaline . MADALINE. I was told you were here.
YOUNG ARDEN. And this is the rueful face you put on for my
 
welcome. Fie, Madaline! you should cheer my    mother, and look pleasantly before her.
MRS. ARDEN. Don't reproach her: she is very kind and very considerate. Without her, I should sink altogether.
YOUNG ARDEN. Then, she is a good girl, and shall be chidden no more.
MADALINE. We shall make up this difference in the next room, where I have ordered some refreshment for you; and you must eat something after your journey, and persuade my aunt to do so, too. You must both eat, if you would not sink under entirely.
YOUNG ARDEN. I thank you, kind cousin, and so we will. Sink under, sayest thou? No, no! we shan't do that, God willing. There is more spirit in us than that comes to;—is there not, mother? Taking her arm under his as they go off.
                                         Exeunt.
 
ACT II. SCENE I. — Bruton's Lodgings. Robinair and Bruton , speaking as they enter. ROBINAIR. And you are just come from hearing Arden's examination? How went it?
BRUTON. It was scarcely closed when I came away,— as I thought you would be waiting for me; but I heard all the material part.
ROBINAIR. And how did he behave himself?
BRUTON. With greater caution and presence of mind than I should have supposed a character like his, depressed with a sense of disgrace, was capable of.
ROBINAIR. Indeed! He kept possession of himself, then?
BRUTON. Wonderfully: he has not betrayed himself in one of his answers, though he was questioned very shrewdly.

 
ROBINAIR. Ha! where have those brains been stored up all this while, which he now brings into use for the first time? “Call no man happy till he be dead,” says the old proverb. We must now add some words to it: Call no man a fool till the same seal has been set upon him.
BRUTON. Ay; strong necessity will make a man wise as well as bold. But your dislike to Arden made you undervalue his abilities.
ROBINAIR. Devil take him and them both!—Not once    off his guard?
BRUTON. Not once, as far as I could judge of the matter. It will be proved, indeed, that, a few days previous to the date of the forgery, he purchased at the stationer's with whom old Fenshaw deals, that peculiar kind of paper upon which the old gentleman always writes his money bills,—a kind which he had never purchased before: but this circumstance is not very conclusive, since Fenshaw acknowledges giving him a bill of the same date, though for a much smaller sum. Now the old gentleman's memory is impaired, and he may easily be supposed to have set down, in mistake, one sum for another. Your having seen the real bill is the only circumstance that
 
makes positively against him. His life, therefore, is in your hands.
ROBINAIR. I know it is. Now is my time of revenge for all the scorn, for all the insults, I have endured from that proud woman.
BRUTON. And is it generous to use it?
ROBINAIR. Generous! and hast thou kept company with me all these years, Bruton, to talk so like a simpleton as thou dost? I have carried myself with a show of specious sentiments to the world; as every    man must do who is not a fool, and intends to live with some credit in it. I have been the delicate, the liberal, the good, and, above all, the good-natured Mr. Robinair, to many; but when did I ever pretend to refinement or generosity before thee?
BRUTON. I cannot, indeed, greatly accuse thee of it. But the present case is so very distressing.
ROBINAIR. It is so; I apprehend as much, good Mr. Bruton.
BRUTON. But you have lived upon poor Arden; you
 
have encouraged him in all kinds of extravagance.
ROBINAIR. Well, Sir, this has not escaped my memory.
BRUTON. You have enticed him to the gaming table, and ruined him.
ROBINAIR. Well; of this, also, I have some recollection.
BRUTON. And your lax doctrines respecting money transactions have, I doubt not, suggested to him, that robbing an old relation of what he could easily spare, and of what, in the course of a few years, would probably be his own by right, could scarcely be considered as a crime.
ROBINAIR. Thou sayest truth: I have done all this. And wherefore have I done it, thinkest thou? For the paltry gains to be made from the ruin of    a man of moderate fortune?— I , who had talents to have speculated on a much grander scale? Out upon thy little narrow conceptions!
BRUTON. Nay, I knew that revenge for disappointed passion had a good share in all your manœuvres.

 
ROBINAIR. Sharp-witted fellow! thou knowest that I loved his wife, and was rejected by her, who preferred this fool to me; that I went abroad in disgust, and, upon my return, insinuated myself into his confidence, with the hope of sowing discord between them, and, if possible, of undermining her fidelity. Thou knowest she has still treated me with disdain, so that nothing but his complete ruin can possibly detach her from him;—thou knowest all this, yet hast the folly to stand before me, with that piteous countenance of thine, desiring me seriously to undo all I have been labouring for so long. Will the wolf, with the prey in his fangs, forbear to devour it, because, forsooth, he will be called an unamiable wolf?
BRUTON. I would have you at least to consider—
ROBINAIR. No! good, compassionate Mr. Bruton: I have considered, and I will not save him. On the scaffold let him die! and let those who have suffered within them the torments that I have endured    condemn me, if they can. It is not by calm, even-tempered dozers through life, such as thou art, that I will submit to be judged.
BRUTON. Then, by my faith, Robinair, thou art a fiend!

 
ROBINAIR. Better be a fiend only, than fiend and fool both. I am a man of more simplicity than thou art; I do not try to have so many contrary qualities at once. Sound no more of that piteous nonsense in my ears!
BRUTON. Pity, indeed, seems out of use at present. Who could have thought that old man would have prosecuted the life of one who, though distantly related to him, is still his nearest of kin! Some secret enemy has goaded him to it.
ROBINAIR. And thou art at a loss, I doubt not, to guess who this wicked enemy may be; judging, as thou dost, in all the imbecility of innocence. Smiling on him with malignant contempt.
Bruton shrinking from him in disgust. I understand that smile.
ROBINAIR. Thou hast understanding enough for that, hast thou?—But do not imagine, however, that I am entirely destitute of every good disposition. I intend, when I am in possession of old Fenshaw's fortune, which he has promised to bequeath to me, to be liberal, and even generous, both to Mrs. Arden and her son. When she is
 
   in my power I will treat her nobly; but she must be in my power.
BRUTON. I have no more to say to you; my pleading is at an end.
ROBINAIR. I am glad to hear it. And now, dropping this subject, which must never again be resumed, let me remind you of the business you are to transact for me at the other end of the town. I have ordered my carriage to meet me here, and it is just drawing up at the door. Hasting away, and returning. Half-past twelve, I think, is the time Mrs. Arden has appointed?
BRUTON. Yes, it is the time she fixed.
ROBINAIR. I must hurry home, then.
                                         Exit. BRUTON alone. And this is the man to whom my cursed extravagance has subjected me, while, having me in his power, he treats me like a menial—like a slave! Oh, thou vice of gaming! thou hast overthrown thy thousands and tens of thousands, never to rise again—never again to bear themselves with the erect dignity of an honest man!
                                         Exit.
 
SCENE II. An open Hall or Lobby in a Prison, from which a wide arched passage branches off. Over the arch is written, “The Felons' Side.” Enter Young Arden , meeting the Head Gaoler . GAOLER. Did you look for any one, young gentleman?
YOUNG ARDEN. I am wrong, I see. Can you show me the way to the debtors' side? There is a prisoner I would inquire after.
GAOLER pointing in another direction. That, Sir, will lead you to it: but you had better stop here a few minutes; for yonder are persons coming this way, conducting a prisoner from examination,—a poor unfortunate gentleman.
YOUNG ARDEN. A gentleman! what is his name?
GAOLER. His name is Arden.
YOUNG ARDEN aside. Examination! is it a meeting with creditors he means?

 
GAOLER. Yonder he comes, poor man!
YOUNG ARDEN. You seem to pity him very much.
GAOLER. It always grieves me to see a gentleman in his situation.
YOUNG ARDEN. You have a kind heart, Sir; but misfortunes will happen to persons in every rank of life?
GAOLER. Here he is, and his friends and counsel with him.
YOUNG ARDEN aside, and shrinking back. I'll stand behind; I cannot go up to him before those people.
Enter Arden , with his Counsel, &c., and walks slowly across the Stage, passing close by his Son, who keeps behind the Gaoler, casting a furtive look at his Father's face as he passes; then, seeing him about to enter the Felons' Passage, springs forward eagerly, as if to prevent him. GAOLER pulling him back. What would you?
YOUNG ARDEN. He is going the wrong way!

 
GAOLER.    He is right enough.
YOUNG ARDEN. That is the felons' side!
GAOLER. And therefore it is his.
YOUNG ARDEN. Thou liest!
GAOLER. What say you?
YOUNG ARDEN. He is no felon!
GAOLER. That will be known when his trial is ended.
YOUNG ARDEN. What trial?
GAOLER. His trial, that comes on to-morrow, for a forgery.  Young Arden sinks to the ground; Gaoler, beckoning to the Under-Gaoler to assist him. Poor lad! this has struck through his heart like an arrow. He must be some near relation to the prisoner.
UNDER GAOLER. His son; I'll pawn my life on't!

 
GAOLER. Ah, poor boy! Chafes his hands and temples, and Young Arden recovers. My good young Sir, go into my house for a while and recover yourself.
YOUNG ARDEN. There was a wonderful buzzing of voices round me.
GAOLER. There was nobody spoke to you but myself; and I spoke softly, too.
YOUNG ARDEN. I must go to my father.
GAOLER. Yes, presently; but not till you are better recovered. Beside, he is engaged at present    with gentlemen, who are assisting him to prepare for his trial.
YOUNG ARDEN. His trial! Oh, oh!—But he is innocent!
GAOLER. Yes, my good boy; we hope so: and then there is no fear of him.
UNDER GAOLER. The innocent are never condemned in this country.

 
YOUNG ARDEN. Ah! were that but certain, he would be safe.
GAOLER. Then he is safe: so, cheer up, my sweet young Sir; and come with me to my house, hard by, till his counsel have left him.—How came you here without a conductor?
YOUNG ARDEN. My mother desired me not to go till she could be with me; but I was impatient, and stole out of the house as soon as she left it to execute some business elsewhere. Alas! I see now why she forbade me to go.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE III. Robinair's House. Enter Mrs. Arden , and a Servant showing her in. SERVANT placing a chair. My master will attend you immediately, Madam.
                                         Exit. MRS. ARDEN alone. And here I am in the house of this man, a humble supplicant for his pity! Righteous
 
Heaven! sunk thus low in misery, give me strength to support it! If I have been haughty or elated in prosperity, teach me now resignation in adversity!—I hear him coming.—Ah! do I feel pride still? No, no, no! what have I to do with feelings like these, when I am pleading for the life of my husband?
Enter Robinair . ROBINAIR. Madam, I have kept myself at home in obedience to your appointment.
MRS. ARDEN. I thank you, Sir, for paying so much regard to one so very miserable. I come to you, Mr. Robinair, a depressed and wretched suitor.
ROBINAIR. Is there any thing, in any situation, that Mrs. Arden will deign to desire of me?
MRS. ARDEN. There is, there is! there is something I must desire—I must beg—I must beseech of you; and I will not do your friendship for Arden the injury to suppose it possible that you should refuse me.
ROBINAIR. I am infinitely honoured by your good opinion,    Madam. In what can I possibly serve you?

 
MRS. ARDEN. O tell me first—tell me faithfully and truly, what is your opinion of my husband's situation. He has been very imprudent, but it cannot be that he is guilty.
ROBINAIR. Imprudence leads men into great temptation. You know whether or not the character of your husband made him more likely than other men to resist it.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas! I know well the weakness of his mind, and I know his necessities were great: but great as they might be, they could never move him to commit such a crime.
ROBINAIR. So do all good wives conceive of their husbands' integrity; particularly those who have enjoyed the felicity of a romantic attachment. How happy should I be to feel equally confident on this point.
MRS. ARDEN. Then you are not? O, no, no! you cannot believe him guilty, how strongly soever appearances may be against him.
ROBINAIR. I wish it were possible for me to hold your faith upon this subject, Madam, or even to avoid
 
the necessity I may be under of appearing on his trial, as the principal witness against him.
MRS. ARDEN.    Merciful Heaven! and do you walk about at liberty, waiting here to give the death-blow to him whom you have called your friend? Fly, fly, I beseech you! On my knees I beseech you to have pity on us. Fly this country for a season, and conceal the place of your retreat.
ROBINAIR. Pray, Madam, do not give me the pain of seeing you in that posture.
MRS. ARDEN. No posture but this till you have granted my request! Have pity on us! Fly the country, or conceal yourself immediately, and we will bless you. Still kneeling, and catching hold of the skirts of his coat, as he retreats from her.
ROBINAIR. I will not listen to another word while you remain thus. Placing a chair for her; they both sit down.
MRS. ARDEN. Then you will listen to me now: you will consent to fly, or conceal yourself, till the trial is over.
ROBINAIR. Are you aware, Madam, that you are desiring
 
me to become an exile, an outlaw? to destroy my own character and credit in the world? Your many kind instances of regard for my happiness may indeed merit a grateful return, but something short of this ironically . Command my services in any other way. My fortune is at your disposal. I will be the protector of yourself    and of your son.
MRS. ARDEN starting from her seat. Heaven forbid! thy protection were the venomous coilings— checking herself, and covering her face with her hands .
ROBINAIR. Of a serpent, you would have said. But, pray, speak without reserve, that we may understand one another completely. My protection is not, perhaps, what you would voluntarily have chosen; but, when no better expedient presents itself, it may possibly be endured. Ay, Madam, and shall be endured, if you hope for any favour for your husband, whom it is in my power to save, without flying the country. Must I commit perjury to please you, whilst your marriage vow, the bane of all my happiness, remains unbroken? Must I be the sinner, and you still continue immaculate? After a pause, in which she seems strongly agitated. Take this into your consideration, Lady. I shall sleep to-night in
 
my house near Chelsea, where, if you will have the condescension to come yourself, and acquaint me with your determination, I shall think myself honoured.—Excuse me now; I am exceedingly hurried with business. Let me have the pleasure of attending you to your chair, Letitia; I once called you by that dear name taking her hand familiarly .
MRS. ARDEN pulling away her hand indignantly.    Insulting, detestable villain! let one general ruin overwhelm us all, before I owe any thing to thee. Hurrying from him.
                                         Exit. ROBINAIR looking after her significantly. Yes; pride must make some blustering, before he be entirely turned out of doors: this is but reasonable, and according to the working of nature. Yes, yes, yes! there will be time enough between this and midnight to smooth the haughty brow into submission. Walking hastily up and down, and stopping now and then as he speaks. Now will the days of thy scorn be remembered with bitterness, when, wife to a degraded husband, thou lookest timidly up to the eyes of a protector—even him whom thou hast rejected with disdain.—Let this once be, and I shall feel it worth all the—No; I will not call it villany
 
—my provocations would justify any thing —all the artful management it has cost me.
Re-enter Mrs. Arden , with mortified timidity. MRS. ARDEN. You will be at Chelsea to-night?
ROBINAIR. Yes, Lady, where I shall be delighted to see you, and to obey your commands.                                          Exit Mrs. Arden . Holding up his hands exultingly. I knew it would be so! There was a rude burst of anger, to be sure; but the vision of a man's bare throat, with a noose about it, has crossed her in the hall, and checked her wayward steps.—Ho, there!
Enter a Servant.    Send notice to the housekeeper at Chelsea that—No, I must write down her directions, else there will be some cursed mistake or other. Goes to a table, and sits down to write, while the Servant waits.
Enter Bruton . BRUTON. You are engaged I see.
ROBINAIR. No, no! I'll speak to you immediately.

 
BRUTON aside. What is he about now? No good, I'm sure, from the eagerness of his eye, and that ironical twisting of his mouth.
ROBINAIR after sealing the note, and giving it to the Servant. Bid Charles carry that to Mrs. Cookum without delay.
                                         Exit Servant, and Robinair comes forward to Bruton with a gay, light step. BRUTON. You are not surely going to Chelsea to-night.
ROBINAIR. But I am; and I tell thee besides, as surely, that thou art going with me.
BRUTON. Indeed! I am engaged elsewhere.
ROBINAIR. Let the elsewhere forego thy gracious presence for this bout. Thou art engaged to me.
BRUTON. Something too arbitrary, methinks.
ROBINAIR. O! displeased, I see! Come, come; do not be a restive fool upon my hands, when I want thee confoundedly. For I must be in waiting there before the hour; and I hate to wait alone.

 
BRUTON. For whom.
ROBINAIR. She who has the prettiest hand and foot of any woman in England; she who has haunted, and scorned, and tormented me for almost the half    of my life; for Arden's wife. I have an appointment with her at midnight.
BRUTON. You do not say so,—you cannot say so. Has misery driven her to this?
ROBINAIR. We shall see—you shall see.
BRUTON. I cannot believe it.
ROBINAIR. Be as sceptical and as cautious as you please; but go with me to Chelsea in the evening, and let seeing and believing be yoke-follows.
BRUTON. I will not go.—Nay, I will go to see you disappointed. You deceive yourself: she cannot have fallen so low.
ROBINAIR. Ay, she was lofty enough once. But the lark cannot be always in the clouds; the heavy rain beats upon her wings, and down she drops upon
 
the wet sod, where earth-grubs and snails are her neighbours.—Disappointed, ha! ha! ha!— But I have other things which thou must do for me in the mean time—nay, don't scowl so— things that must be done.—Ha! here comes Beacham's man with the money.
Enter a Person, with a small bag. BRUTON aside, as he turns from Robinair . Domineering insolence! it is insufferable.
ROBINAIR to the Stranger. Good morning, Mr. Martin; how is your master? You have brought, I see, the little sum that was left unsettled between us. He is an    honourable fellow. But thou shakest thy head, man; thou lookest ruefully.
STRANGER. Come honesty first, and honour will follow.
ROBINAIR. Fogh! some old saw of your grandmother's; quite out of date now, my good friend. Look not so grum at me: there is something to make thee more cheerful. Offering him money with one hand, while he receives the bag with the other.
STRANGER. I'll have nothing of yours, Sir.

 
ROBINAIR. No! good gold pieces are not to be despised.
STRANGER. Be they gold or copper it is the same to me.
                                         Exit. ROBINAIR laughing. What think you of this angry fool, Bruton?
BRUTON. He has cause to be angry. You have stripped the coat from the back of his poor silly master.
ROBINAIR. Well; he will go to Paris in his waistcoat. He may find it the fashion there, perhaps, to go so clothed.
BRUTON. And how long will he keep his waistcoat when he gets amongst the worthies of the Palais Royal?
ROBINAIR. What does that signify? The thick waters of the Seine will make him coat vest, and winding-sheet, all in one, with no more to do about the matter.
Enter a Man, with papers, &c. Oh, ho! Mr. Skriever; you are come at last with the deeds.

 
SKRIEVER.    Yes, Sir, and you will find the security good, and the interest of your money regularly paid.
ROBINAIR. I trust so; for otherwise I shall foreclose upon you without hesitation. Go into my library, and I'll sign it there.                                          Exit Skriever by a side door. To Bruton , after going about the room fantastically, with a gay, skipping step. The breezes of fortune, you see, are in my sails.
BRUTON. But you may be wrecked full soon, notwithstanding.
ROBINAIR. Never fear: I am a skilful pilot as well as a bold sailor, and when I am—O what may I not be!—I will make a man of thee, Bruton.
BRUTON. Could you restore me to the man I was, when you first took me up, I should ask no better fortune, and take my leave of you for ever.
ROBINAIR. What! leave me? No, no! I must not part with that sober face, and seeming sanctity of thine: they will be necessary to keep me in credit with the world. “Hold your tongue,” will the faded maids and dowagers exclaim, as
 
they arrange their cards, “I will not hear one word against Sir John Robinair, as long as he is so intimate with good Mr. Bruton.”
BRUTON. Sir John Robinair!
ROBINAIR. Yes; I shall be a baronet by and by, you know. There will be nothing very wonderful    in that, surely. But I waste time here: I must go and sign those deeds.
                                         Exit into the side door. BRUTON. He is mad with prosperity. But pride comes before a fall; and may the proverb be verified here!
                                         Exit.
 
ACT III. The Prison; Arden is discovered sitting in a disconsolate posture. After a pause, he rises, and walks once or twice across the front of the Stage. ARDEN. And if it should come to this, in what is it really different from that which, many times, in the accumulation of my distresses, I have wished for—I have almost been upon the brink of perpetrating? How often, after returning in despair from the gaming-house, have I wistfully looked at the pistols that hung on the wall, or the razor that lay on my table!—Ah! but disgrace, disgrace! The murmurs of detestation and pity; the broad gaze of the innumerable multitude; the last horrible act imposed on a passive wretch;—this is what the human mind strongly recoils from! this is dreadful! Sinks down again upon his seat.
Enter Under Gaoler , bearing a covered dish, &c. UNDER GAOLER. I have brought you something to eat, Sir: you will be quite faint if you fast longer.

 
ARDEN. Take it away, friend; I cannot eat yet.
UNDER GAOLER. Pray, Sir, be advised. If it were but a single morsel, it would do you good.
ARDEN. Take it away—take it away, I pray thee. Why art thou so importunate?
UNDER GAOLER. There is a young gentleman below, who wishes to see you, and my master is anxious you should take some refreshment before he comes to you; just, as it were, to strengthen you first.
ARDEN starting up.    A young gentleman, said ye? A boy, do you mean?
UNDER GAOLER. Yes, Sir, one of your good, manly, gentleman-like school-boys; but wonderfully out of heart, poor fellow.
ARDEN. Good God! Show him up immediately.
UNDER GAOLER. Yes, Sir; but will you not take a little wine first, if you will eat nothing?

 
ARDEN. No, no, kind fool! it would choke me. Show him up immediately.                                          Exit Gaoler . Now do I feel all my miseries! Now am I the selfish, the cruel, the disgraceful father. O God! O God! what is the gaze of a multitude to this boy's eye?
Enter Young Arden , who, running up to his father, falls upon his neck, and bursts into tears. ARDEN. Boy, boy! why hast thou come to me?
YOUNG ARDEN. To bless you, father.
ARDEN. To bless me, boy?
YOUNG ARDEN. Ay, and to cling to you, father: to be with you and serve you, father; who should do that, as you are now circumstanced, but me?
ARDEN. Woe is me! that thou shouldst have such an office! It must not be.
YOUNG ARDEN. Turn not away from me thus! I am now at your feet in a posture you have never seen me take before. Kneeling and catching his hand.

 
ARDEN.    I know thee well: thou art a generous boy; thou art a noble boy; but what a father am I? I have blasted thy fair promise, freshly springing plant! I have blighted thee with disgrace!
YOUNG ARDEN. Say not so, my dear father! what ruin is there to him who has a sound mind and a sound body left, and is willing to be a poor man, since Heaven pleases not that he should be a rich one? And for disgrace, I shall think it no disgrace to be the son of an unfortunate father, knowing that he is only unfortunate. Look not on me then with such anguish! You will be able to vindicate your character to the world.  Arden shakes his head. Nay, and if all the world regard you as guilty, I will believe you to be innocent.
ARDEN. Oh, oh, oh! This is misery indeed.
YOUNG ARDEN. Why that terrible groan, dear father?
ARDEN. Thou wringest my heart, my son!—Little dost thou know—but thou shalt know it. I have kept thy mother in ignorance, but I will
 
conceal nothing from thee. Going to the door to see if it be closely shut.
YOUNG ARDEN. Good heaven! what is it you would tell me?
ARDEN. The fatal progress of a ruined unfortunate man.
YOUNG ARDEN.    I know you are unfortunate.
ARDEN. Hold thy peace, and hear me out.—Naturally thoughtless and profuse, and fond of the pitiful distinction that expense bestows, I dissipated an easy fortune which ought to have been thine, Edmond.
YOUNG ARDEN. Nay, nay! take no thought of that: let it go. It is but a feather in the air; and may light where it lists.
ARDEN. Having squandered it, as I said, that false friend Robinair—
YOUNG ARDEN. Is he false?
ARDEN. False, base, and treacherous.

 
YOUNG ARDEN. May he be sent to perdition then!
ARDEN. Be quiet, be quiet, and hear me out. That false friend, who had insinuated himself into my confidence, by many flattering praises and professions of regard, and by sometimes accommodating me with small loans of money, which I still hoped to repay, introduced me to the gambling table. There I was at first allowed to be successful, and encouraged to risk still higher stakes: at last a tide of ill luck, as it was called, set strongly against me, and I was borne down to ruin and despair.
YOUNG ARDEN.    O what you must have suffered, father!
ARDEN. I was not a very happy man, Edmond; and when I thought of your mother and you—
YOUNG ARDEN. Nay, nay! say nothing of this. We shall do very well: we are satisfied.
ARDEN. I will go on with my story. Being thus desperate, I wrote to my old relation Fenshaw for the loan of a thousand pounds, which I sincerely meant to repay, whenever I should have it in my power.

 
YOUNG ARDEN. I knew it, Sir: I knew you would willingly wrong no man.
ARDEN. Nay, listen. Fenshaw, suspecting the state of my affairs, but pitying my distress, sent me, indeed, a bill on his banker, but it was only for a hundred pounds, which was nothing to my necessities. I had, formerly, to amuse myself, imitated different kinds of hand-writing, and once,—this is the circumstance that, if brought in evidence, along with another only known to Robinair, would have the strongest effect on the decision of a jury; namely, his having seen the bill which Fenshaw sent me. Nothing was concealed from him. Once, after copying a note of Fenshaw's so exactly that it could not be discovered    from the original, I showed it to Robinair and said, “This may be a resource to me in time of need.”
YOUNG ARDEN eagerly. But you said it only in jest?
ARDEN. I did so then: but ruin overwhelmed me; I had no resource, and a strong temptation took hold of me. To convert this bill for a hundred into one for a thousand pounds, seemed so easily done; and still, like a madman, confident of retrieving
 
all if I were but once more enabled to attempt fortune, I thought I should contrive to repay the sum, before the fraud could be discovered. This fatal idea came into my head in my despair, was rejected, yet still returned to me again, and, at last, an irresistible temptation fastened itself upon my miserable imbecility.
YOUNG ARDEN in a half-choked voice. But you resisted it?
ARDEN. Alas! I did not.  Young Arden staggers back some paces, then sinks down upon a chair, and from that upon the ground, where he throws himself along, covering his face with his hands, while Arden strides to and fro on the front of the Stage, in violent agitation.
Enter Mrs. Arden . MRS. ARDEN to her husband, not perceiving her son, who is partly concealed by the chair from which he sank. Ha! how is it now? Thou art more overcome than I have ever seen thee before. Alas! if thy strength fail thee now, when thou hast such exertions to make, what will become of us?
ARDEN. Let me alone—let me alone: thoughts of unutterable anguish are dealing with me.

 
MRS. ARDEN. Alas! alas! I thought to have brought thee    comfort.
ARDEN. What comfort? Where is it?
MRS. ARDEN. I went in quest of it, but I have returned empty. He is inexorable.
ARDEN. O! I remember now. Thou hast been with Robinair then?
MRS. ARDEN. Yes; I am come from his house, where I have knelt and wept at his feet.
ARDEN. And he is inexorable?
MRS. ARDEN. There is nothing to hope for from him. He has talked of befriending me and my son; but for thee he has no pity. He has talked, indeed, as if certain compliances on my part might have power to move him in your behalf, and desired me to acquaint him with my determination this night at his house near Chelsea; but there was a malignant mockery on his face, as he spoke, which made me regard what he said as an unworthy insult, that had no serious meaning.

 
ARDEN. But it had a meaning,—a damned meaning. My life is in his power, and he had the audacity, even to me, to propose that which, were I but to utter it, would cover us both with shame.
MRS. ARDEN. Let it not then be uttered! Thou hast rejected the detestable proposal with abhorrence:    I know thou hast; and, for the rest, let Heaven in its mercy send us deliverance.  Arden groans. O! how is this? Where is that vehemence of indignation? Surely thou hast rejected it with abhorrence!
ARDEN. I did reject it with abhorrence, and I do so still. But, oh! Letitia! there are moments when the thoughts of public disgrace; of the last dreadful act of dying on a scaffold, a spectacle to the unfeeling multitude, does so terribly beset my imagination, that, were it possible to endure the idea of thy degradation, I could almost—
YOUNG ARDEN who has been eagerly listening, raising himself meantime from the ground by degrees, now springs upon his feet, and rushing between his father and mother, separates them vehemently with his thrown-out arms. But it is impossible.
MRS. ARDEN to her son. Ha! art thou here?

 
ARDEN to his son, who is looking fixedly upon him. Take off thine eyes from me, boy; they strike me to the earth. Look not so on one whom thou hast called thy father. I know the spirit that is in thee, and, alas! I know that it is none of mine. Thou hast clung round my knees, and the first word of thy lips has been my name; thou hast clung to my side, and appeared to belong to me, but the soul that is in thee claims a far higher descent; thou shouldst have been the son of a nobler father. Yet strike me not to the earth in my wretchedness: I can bear    any degradation but this.
YOUNG ARDEN. Father, father! speak not such words of humiliation: they are in my heart like daggers; they pierce it to the core. If I have looked at you as I ought not to have looked, punish me as you will, but, oh! not in this manner! Give me any other chastisement! You are the father that Heaven has given me, and I will be your son in riches and poverty; in honour and disgrace.
ARDEN. My noble, my generous boy! Oh, the curse of my unutterable folly! What a proud father I might have been! But now—No, no! change thy name, and let no creature know who it was that gave thee being. Let me die the
 
death of a malefactor: it will be horrible, but it will be short.
YOUNG ARDEN. May you not yet be saved?
ARDEN. I ask it not now: I am resigned, if thou canst save thyself from infamy, and wilt blot out from thy remembrance that a weak wish for life did once for a moment betray me into unworthy thoughts.
MRS. ARDEN. O God! and is there no deliverance for thee? Can any thing be a crime that saves thy life?
ARDEN. Speak not of this again. The degrading wish    which I have torn from my breast, shall return to it no more. Be calm, be resigned, my dear Latitia: there is no deliverance.
YOUNG ARDEN after a thoughtful pause, springing up the air. But there is—there is deliverance!
ARDEN. What keen voice of exclamation is this? Art thou beside thyself?
YOUNG ARDEN. No; but I am beyond myself. I am more than myself. The strength of a man thrills along
 
my new-strung limbs, and with it there is deliverance for thee. Running hastily to the door.
ARDEN. What dost thou mean? Where art thou running to, Edmond?
MRS. ARDEN. Come back, come back, child: thou shalt not leave us.
YOUNG ARDEN. Oh, call me not back! Let me be for this one day unquestioned, and free from control, and all my life after I am subject to your will.
ARDEN. Knowest thou of any interest to be moved? of any means that we are ignorant of?
YOUNG ARDEN. Yes, father; and ignorant you must be. Let me go, I beseech you: I have a thing in my head, and with you I dare no longer remain.
ARDEN. This is a strangely sudden thought.
MRS. ARDEN. When shall I see thee again? I shall be at home in an hour or two.
YOUNG ARDEN.    But I sha'n't return to you then.

 
MRS. ARDEN. Before dark, at least, I may expect you?
YOUNG ARDEN. I sha'n't return so soon.
MRS. ARDEN. Good Heavens! when shall I see thee?
YOUNG ARDEN. Enquire not about me, I beseech you! After midnight, perhaps—but rise not when I knock at the door. In the morning—daylight will be dawning on the sky when I see you again. Farewell, farewell! and may heaven have pity upon us!
                                         Exit hastily. MRS. ARDEN running after him. I cannot let him go: there is something in his words that alarm me.
ARDEN pulling her back. Do not go after him, nor prevent him from following his own generous impulse, noble creature! There is some person whom he hopes to interest strongly in my favour;—some of his school-fellows, perhaps, connected with people in power. It is vain, indeed; yet let him follow his own ideas. He will have satisfaction afterwards in having made the attempt.
MRS. ARDEN. Pray Heaven it be so! I have strange fear
 
upon me that I cannot account for. 'Tis like a presentiment: I have become superstitious.— What if I should see him no more?
ARDEN. Do not give way to it, my dear love! Misery    makes us all superstitious. Enter Gaoler . Does any body wish to see me?
GAOLER. Your Counsel, Sir, are returned; and as you are permitted to use the next apartment, where there is better accommodation than here, I have shown them into it, and they wait for you.
ARDEN. I will come to them immediately.                                          Exit Gaoler . Leave me then, my dear Letitia, and keep up your heart, if you can. I shall see you again in the evening.—God bless and support you, under the sad trials which my sins and follies have brought upon you!
                                         Exeunt.
 
ACT IV. Scene A green Lawn, with Borders of Flowers, in front of Robinair's House, near Chelsea. Moonlight. Enter Robinair and Bruton from the house. ROBINAIR. The night air is cool and refreshing here: it is stifling to sit in that close library, which you are so fond of. Walking quickly up and down, and sometimes stopping to listen.
BRUTON. Yet you give yourself no time to enjoy it. Is that hurried pace the motions of one who comes forth to breathe the still air of evening? There is a sky, too, over your head, with that peaceful, brilliant moon shining from it, to which the dullest eye might be turned with a species of devotion, yet you look not up once to behold it.
ROBINAIR. This vile state of suspense! Who thinks of moon, clouds, or sky, when enduring it? Listening. I hear a footstep coming up the lane.

 
BRUTON. My ears are less quick; I hear nothing: and if you are come out to listen for the arrival of her whom you expect, you will have the cool air about you long enough, I believe.
ROBINAIR. What! think you she will not come?
BRUTON. I am almost certain she will not.
ROBINAIR. Thou little knowest how the proud may be subdued by distress.
BRUTON. If I have any true knowledge of Arden, with all his weakness and folly, he will not submit to be saved by such base means as you propose.
ROBINAIR.    Pshaw, pshaw! thou art too simple; contemptibly simple. The love of life works powerfully in stronger minds than his. Besides, the lady may be willing to save him without his consent. She, depend upon it, will be here by and by.
BRUTON. You are very sanguine.
ROBINAIR. Not unreasonably so: she will be here ere
 
long. And then that eye of pride, those lips of scorn, that step of haughty defiance—ay, then shall I see them changed—changed into humble, abashed, submissive gentleness. This will be triumph! this will be happiness! yea, that very thing, happiness, which I have been pursuing all my life, and have never yet overtaken.
BRUTON. And so you confess, after all your successes in life, the fools you have cajoled, the dangers you have escaped, the sums you have amassed, the passions you have gratified, that happiness is a thing which has still escaped you?
ROBINAIR. Yes, Bruton, in some cursed way or other it still has escaped me.
BRUTON. But you are resolved to make sure of it now, by becoming the object of concealed detestation to one whose open disdain has so long and so    sorely galled you?
ROBINAIR. Well, be it so! be it so! let her detest me as she will; but she shall, nevertheless, be the humbled mistress, and I the condescending protector.

 
BRUTON. An enviable state, truly, you project for yourself!
ROBINAIR. And Arden, too; he must in his turn give place, and bend his blushing brow to mortification and contempt.
BRUTON. A blessed sight to behold!
ROBINAIR. Ay, and that proud boy of his, who begins already, like his lofty mother, to bear himself with a spirit above his years, even he must crouch and hold his tongue in humbling consciousness.
BRUTON. And thus circumstanced, you propose to be happy. Why, the fiends themselves enjoy as good happiness as this; and if such be your notion of enjoyment, Robinair, you need not be afraid of joining company with them hereafter, for you will certainly have served your time here as a noviciate of their order.
ROBINAIR. Well, if I do take that road to preferment, I sha'n't have the regret of breaking up my intimacy with thee.

 
BRUTON. Nay, I know not that. I am disgusted with this way of life, I assure you, and have very    serious thoughts of reforming my bad habits.
ROBINAIR. Reforming, ha! ha! ha! Why, what's the matter with thee? Hast thou got gout in thy head, or water in thy chest; or has thy good-natured physician threatened thee with apoplexy? Ha! ha! I am concerned to enquire into this matter, thou knowest, as thou intendest most certainly to make me thine executor.
BRUTON. No, Robinair, I have none of the diseases you mention, nor any other, that I know of; but no one knows how long he may enjoy either health or life.
ROBINAIR with mock solemnity. To be sure, nobody knows how soon his glass may be run. Nobody knows when death may knock at his own door—we are all here to-day, but know not where we may be to-morrow. I have heard all this twenty years ago, from a much better preacher than thou art.—Come, come, let us go into the house again: our cool tankard is waiting for us.
BRUTON. As you please: but here comes your man from town.

 
Enter Morgan . Returned from thy watching post, Morgan?
MORGAN. Yes, Sir.
ROBINAIR. And with any intelligence?
MORGAN.    I have kept my station there all the evening, on pretence of condoling with old Humphry, who is in grievous distress for his master; but I know not that I have picked up any thing particular.
BRUTON. What has the lady been doing, Morgan?
ROBINAIR eagerly. Yes, what of her? Was she at home, or at the prison?
MORGAN. She returned from the prison for an hour or two in the evening, and, after writing some letters, as they told me, or such-like business as that, returned to the prison again, where, she said to Humphry, she should stay till a late hour, desiring Robert to come with a chair for her.
ROBINAIR. Not the chariot?—This really looks—but
 
But art thou sure the chariot is not ordered afterwards?
BRUTON. You would fain have the poor fellow to assist you in deceiving yourself.—Or did you not hear, Morgan, that it is suspected she will come round in her chair by Chelsea, on her way from the prison?
MORGAN. No, Sir; I heard little of her intentions, they were all so taken up, before I came away, about young master.
ROBINAIR. And what of him? What has he been doing?
MORGAN. After spending a long time in the closet where    Mr. Arden keeps his arms, he has left the house without speaking to any one, and unseen by any body; and all the servants, particularly Humphry, are in a terrible quandary about him; for he had not returned when I came away, and they fear some mischief has befallen him.
ROBINAIR. Much disturbance about nothing, talking fools! They like to be frightened about something: it is an occupation for them, and does not hinder them from eating their supper.

 
MORGAN. Nay, Sir; not a morsel has been eaten by them: for they all love the poor youth as if he were kith and kin to every one of them.
BRUTON. He is, indeed, a fine-spirited creature. In his father's closet, said you?
ROBINAIR. And are any of the arms missing?
MORGAN. Humphry says a light fowling-piece is gone; but he is not sure that Mr. Arden himself did not take it some time ago to be cleaned.
ROBINAIR. And the old fool is afraid the child will blow out his brains with it.—Well, since thou hast no other intelligence than this, Morgan, go thy ways to thy supper. Exit Morgan . And let us move into the house also. See, the candles are lighted now in the parlour, and our cool tankard    waits for us.
BRUTON. With all my heart: we have been in this chill air long enough.
                                         Exeunt into the house.
 
Enter Young Arden , with a fowling-piece in his hand, stepping cautiously, and then looking round, as if disappointed. YOUNG ARDEN. He has got into the house already. After watching here since twilight, I have suffered him to escape. Wretched timidity! though his friend stood so near him, I am marksman enough to have been in no danger of killing the wrong person. Foolish, cruel caution! must I return to my father again, and no deliverance gained? I will not return! Here will I watch till the morning, and shoot him in the light of day.—I will not return again to shame, and disgrace, and misery, and despair. Observing light from the window, and Robinair and Bruton , who make their appearance within, and sit down at a table, on which are some refreshments. Ha! yonder he is again! Now is my time. Raising his arm. Hand, hand, be thou strong and steady! heart, be thou firm! The life of my father is in the exertion of a moment. And Thou, great Father of all! wilt thou pardon this act? Wilt Thou pity me? Wilt Thou have mercy on me? O, have mercy! have mercy! though I dare not pray to thee! Goes nearer to the window, and points his gun, when Bruton within changes his position, and comes upon a line with Robinair .
 
Nay, this must not be: I must not take two lives at once,—the innocent with the guilty.    After a pause. There is a window at the end of the room, looking to the beech walk; I'll fire in at that.
                                         Exit, making his way hastily through shrubs and bushes, which knock off his hat as he goes out. Presently the report of a gun is heard, and Robinair within is seen to fall. Great commotion of Servants rushing into the room, and aiding Bruton to give him assistance, &c. &c. Soon after Morgan and others issue from the house to give the alarm. MORGAN. Holla! holla! you who pass there! Murder! murder! There is murder committed here; and we demand of every body in the king's name to give us assistance.
Enter two Men by a wicket gate. FIRST MAN. Murder! where? who?
MORGAN. In the house yonder! my master!
SECOND MAN. We heard the report of fire-arms. Was it then?

 
MORGAN. Yes, and the murderer can be but a little way off. Assist us in securing him.
SERVANT. There is a breach in the hedge at the end of that walk: he will escape that way if we are not quick. Let somebody come with me, for I cannot grapple with a ruffian single-handed.
FIRST MAN looking in at the window. Ay, there lies the body within, as stark as any corse, upon a board.
MORGAN. For God's sake, don't think of satisfying curiosity now! Try to secure the villain first, or he will escape. Come with me in this direction; and to Second Man  do you follow the footman yonder, since nobody will go alone.
FIRST MAN as they are about to disperse. Here is a hat on the grass.
OMNES gathering round him.    A hat?
SECOND MAN. Poh! it is but a boy's hat. Some varlet has come over the hedge to gather gooseberries.
MORGAN. Is there a name in it?

 
FIRST MAN. No, there is no name; so what does it signify? I'll e'en take it home with me. It will fit my Neddy to a marvel.
MORGAN. Do what you will with it: but let us run. We lose time here.
                                         Exeunt different ways. SCENE II. The hall in Arden's house. Enter Madaline and Robert . MADALINE. It grows very late; did not the clock strike now?
ROBERT. Yes, Madam; twelve and the quarter after.
MADALINE. I know not what to do, Robert: your poor mistress is in a terrible state of anxiety.
ROBERT. Yes, poor lady! I have listened for this half hour to her steps pacing backwards and forwards
 
in her own room, and it has gone to my heart to hear it. I'd give the best suit I ever had to my back, that my young master were returned.
MADALINE. Humphry is a long time gone.
ROBERT. An hour and twenty minutes.
MADALINE. Only an hour and twenty minutes! But you have reckoned the time with a more composed mind than we have done: perhaps you may be right.
ROBERT. My watch has reckoned it, Madam, which is more composed than any of us.
MADALINE. Would he were returned!
ROBERT. Shall I go after him?
MADALINE. That would do no good. Open the street door, and listen if there be any footsteps coming.  Robert opens the door and listens. Do you hear any thing?
ROBERT.    Yes, I do hear footsteps.

 
MADALINE. Light steps like those of a boy?
ROBERT without side of the door. No, Ma'am; mighty heavy steps: but they are Humphry's, I believe.
MADALINE. Ah! then he brings no good tidings. Do you hear no one coming after him? Is he alone?
ROBERT. No one, Ma'am; he is alone.
MADALINE. Then he has not found him; where can he possibly have gone to?—Humphry, I hope, has not told his mistress of his having been in his father's closet before he went out, and his suspicions about the fowling-piece.
ROBERT. He has not; and, indeed, he thinks now that the fowling-piece was carried to the gunsmith's some little time ago.
MADALINE. Humphry must be at hand now. Call to him.
ROBERT thrusting his head again out at the door. Holla! holla, there!—It is him, Madam; he answers me.

 
Enter Mrs. Arden , running eagerly. MRS. ARDEN. What voices are those at the door? Is he returned?
MADALINE. Humphry is returned.
MRS. ARDEN. And alone?—O God! some mischief has befallen him. He would not have staid so late, to make me miserable. He never before,—even in his play, he was always considerate for me;    and would he now, when all this misery is upon me—O, no! some mischief has befallen him.
MADALINE. Be more calm, my dear aunt, and hear what Humphry has to tell us. He is just at the door.
Enter Humphry . MRS. ARDEN running to meet him. Have you seen him?
HUMPHRY. No, Madam.
MRS. ARDEN. Have you heard of him?
HUMPHRY. No, Madam.

 
MRS. ARDEN. Nor seen any one who has seen him or heard of him?
HUMPHRY. No, Madam. I have been everywhere in search of him, and have enquired of everybody I have met, but can learn nothing of him. There is scarcely a creature now upon the streets but the watchman, and you can hear his heavy steps dumping upon the pavement a quarter of a mile off.
MRS. ARDEN rushing towards the door. I'll go myself.
MADALINE holding her back. Alas! what can you do by going out? The night is dark, and you will meet with nothing but disappointment, perhaps insult.
MRS. ARDEN. Let me meet with what I may, I will go; I will not be withheld. No night is dark to a mother who is in search of her son. What is insult to me? I shall be strong; I shall fear    nothing.
HUMPHRY. Indeed, indeed, my dear Madam, you will wander about to no purpose: and if my young master should return while you are gone, we shall have him running out again after you, like
 
a mad creature. Be persuaded to stay here: he will break his heart when he misses you, and finds only us to receive him.
MADALINE. Yes, Humphry says right. Do return to your chamber. Leading her gently away. Humphry will be upon the watch, and give you notice when he comes.
MRS. ARDEN. I cannot, I cannot! I'll walk up and down here. I shall go mad if I return to my chamber. Walks rapidly backwards and forwards; at last a knock is heard at the door, and she runs to it. It is he! it is he!
Enter Young Arden . My son! my son! thank God I have thee again! Long, long have I watched for thee: I have been distracted with fear. Has accident,— has illness detained thee?
YOUNG ARDEN. No, mother; I am here now.
MRS. ARDEN. Yes, thou art here now; and I would not have thee from me again for a world's wealth told ten times over. Looking earnestly at him. But where hast thou been? Thou art wonderfully
 
pale and spent. Hast thou come along    thus through the night? Where is thy hat?
YOUNG ARDEN. Upon my head, is it not?
MRS. ARDEN. No, my love: hast thou been wandering bare-headed in the night air?
YOUNG ARDEN putting his hand to his head. I knew not that I was so.
HUMPHRY. My dear young Sir, what way came you? I have been in search of you everywhere.
YOUNG ARDEN. I can't tell. I ran straight forward from it, through every open lane and passage that I saw; and here I am at last.
MRS. ARDEN. Straight forward from what? Did any thing pursue thee?
YOUNG ARDEN. in a quick altered voice. Yes, something did.—Have you any wine at hand, good Humphry? I am almost wild with faintness.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas! I think thou art.

 
HUMPHRY. Did you say wine, Sir, which you dislike so much?
YOUNG ARDEN. Never mind, never mind; give me a good draught, though there were arsenic in it.
MRS. ARDEN. Oh! thou art not well. Run, Madaline, and fetch him some cordial. Exeunt Madaline and Humphry different ways. O what is the matter with thee? Where hast thou been? Thou wentest out to seek deliverance for us,    and the rebuff of some cruel-hearted man sends thee back broken-hearted and hopeless to me and to thy miserable father.
YOUNG ARDEN his eyes lighting up keenly. No, mother; I do not so return. I have kept my word with you: my father's deliverance is earned.
MRS. ARDEN. And dost thou tell me so with a joy so wild and so terrible?
YOUNG ARDEN. Hush, hush, hush! Speak not to me; look not at me; tell it to no one; be as if you knew it not. Say in your own heart, “He shall live but lock it up there unuttered.

 
MRS. ARDEN. Dear child! thy words strangely perplex me. But here is the wine. Re-enter Humphry with wine. Take a good draught of it, and then go to rest.— But will you not eat something? He shakes his head. Well, then, I will not urge thee.
HUMPHRY filling up a glass with wine. Here, my young Sir, and may it do you good; but I fear it will fly to your head, as you are not used to it.
YOUNG ARDEN having swallowed the wine hastily. No, it will not: I may take any thing now.
Re-enter Madaline with a phial. MRS. ARDEN. We had better not give him too many things at once. Go to your chamber, Edmond, and sleep will restore you.
YOUNG ARDEN. Sleep! Ay, if I could sleep.—Will you remove    the light?
MRS. ARDEN. Not if you desire to have it left.
HUMPHRY. My dear boy! something has scared you.
 
I'll leave the light in your room; and shall I sit by you?
YOUNG ARDEN eagerly. Do so, good Humphry! that is very kind in thee.—And so, dearest mother, don't come with me, but let me pass to my chamber and lie down. Hurrying away.
MRS. ARDEN. And wilt thou not let me bless thee ere thou goest?
YOUNG ARDEN returning to her. Thy blessing, my mother! After receiving her embrace, he kisses her hand fervently. If Heaven bless what thou blessest, I shall have nothing to fear.
MRS. ARDEN. And dost thou fear any thing?
YOUNG ARDEN. No; nothing, when I look upon you. Good night! good night!
                                         Exit, hurrying from her, and followed by Humphry . MADALINE observing Mrs. Arden , who remains for some time lost in thought. My dear Mrs. Arden! what is your mind fixed upon so intently? Now that he is safely returned and gone to bed, take some care of yourself.
 
Let me entreat you to take some nourishment, and lie down for a few hours. Remember you must go in the morning to Mr. Arden, that you may see him before he goes to court; and the trial begins early.
MRS. ARDEN starting from her reverie.    True; it is still night: it is not the hour yet.
MADALINE. It is still night. I am begging of you to take some refreshment and go to bed, as you must be up early in the morning; and what you have to go through to-morrow, requires more strength than, I fear, you possess. Do you hear me?
MRS. ARDEN. Yes, Madaline. I heard you speak; I knew you spoke kindly to me, but I knew not what you said.
MADALINE. Let me go with you then to your room; and cheer up a little. All may yet go well.
MRS. ARDEN. O, if that be! if all indeed go well, I shall soon cheer up.
                                         Exeunt, Madaline supporting her as they retire.
 
ACT V. SCENE I. — Bruton's Lodgings. Bruton and his friend, a Justice of the Peace, are discovered in earnest conversation. JUSTICE. And you decidedly say your suspicions rest not on Arden.
BRUTON. Decidedly. There is not one trait in the character of the man that should raise in my mind the slightest suspicion; nor even any circumstance regarding him of any kind, his interest in the death of the deceased only excepted.
JUSTICE. Did you not hint at another person whom you do suspect?
BRUTON. I know a man whose fortune Robinair has ruined, whose sister he has seduced and abandoned, and whom I believe to be capable of executing the fellest revenge; yet, as I have no actual evidence to support my suspicions, you must not receive them from me as any kind of information to be acted upon. It were hard,
 
indeed, if the injuries he has received were alone made the cause of more injuries.
Enter a Servant. BRUTON. What do you want? I am at present engaged.
SERVANT. One of Mr. Robinair's servants is below, Sir; and a poor labouring man is along with him, who found a hat last night on the grass-plat near the house, just after the murder was committed.
BRUTON. Show them up immediately.
                                         Exit Servant. JUSTICE.    This will probably lead to the discovery.
BRUTON. Yes; murder, the proverb says, is always found out. And, in truth, it is often discovered by circumstances that appear at the first wonderfully trifling and minute.
JUSTICE. When men commit such deeds, they do so in a state of mind which renders them incapable of perceiving what circumstances will excite or prevent suspicion; and they are as often detected from caution as from oversight.

 
BRUTON. True: the mind in that state may be cunning; but it is a cunning which betrays oftener than conceals; like that of the poor cushat, which vainly tries to mislead a practised fowler by hovering over the bushes where her nest and her nestlings are not.
Enter Morgan and a Labourer. BRUTON. Well, Morgan, what brings you and this good man here?
MORGAN. This man, Sir, found a hat last night.
LABOURER. Ay, please your honour, just as we were all setting off after the villain that killed that there gentleman.
JUSTICE. Tell us, my good friend, in what manner you found it.
LABOURER. In no manner at all, please your honour. I    only sees it on the grass, and I picks it up.
JUSTICE. Well, then, it was lying on the grass when you picked it up?

 
LABOURER. Yes, your honour; and I'll tell you all how it was, without either meddling or making with it; though I did think there was no great harm in carrying it home to my poor boy, who has been going about bare-headed for this fortnight past, like an ouzle, with its feathers on end.
JUSTICE. Well, well; where did you find it?
LABOURER. Last night, your honour.
JUSTICE. I should call that when .
BRUTON. You puzzle him, my good Sir.
JUSTICE. No matter.— To Labourer. When did you find it, then?
LABOURER. Just there, too, please your honour.
BRUTON. Don't question him so methodically; but let him tell his own story first.
LABOURER to Bruton . Thank your honour, that is just what I means to do as soon as I can get the end of it. For
 
you see, Sirs, as soon as I heard the gun go off, and some one a-calling out “Murder!” I guessed as how some mischief was a-doing; so I runs into the garden in no time, and just before me, on the grass, near a thicket, on this hand of me    —No, no; on the other hand of me,—a yard off, belike, for I'll tell your honours exact how it was, I sees a black thing lying on the ground, at my feet.
JUSTICE. And near the house? about a yard from it, you say?
LABOURER. About a yard from the right or the left of me, I an't quite sure which; but, as I said, I took it for some black thing; but when I came close to it, I found it was a hat.
JUSTICE. Well, well; give us no more of thy story at present, but let us look at the hat. Is there a name in it?
LABOURER. No, your honour; and so I thought no harm to take it home to my poor boy. Shows the hat.
BRUTON starting as he looks on it. Good God!

 
JUSTICE. What, Bruton, do you recognise it?
BRUTON. I fear I do.
SERVANT to Bruton , after examining it. It is the very same hat, Sir, that you gave in a present to young Mr. Arden, before he went last to school. I'll swear to it: I know it by the twisting of the band.
JUSTICE. This is a strong fact. Come with me, my good friends: your several evidences must be taken in a more formal manner. You seem    much hurt, Bruton.
BRUTON. I am so.— Aside. Is it possible that the wretched boy has sacrificed himself for his father? To the Justice . I'll follow you presently.
JUSTICE. Nay, you must go with me now: I must not leave you behind. My duty requires me not to lose sight of you.
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE II. The Street before Arden's House. Enter Humphry , meeting Robert , who comes out from the house. ROBERT. Returned from the Court already? Is the trial over?
HUMPHRY. Ay; thank God for it! and our master is a free man again.
ROBERT skipping about. O, rare news! rare news! Let us run and tell everybody. Acquitted,—acquitted; not guilty?
HUMPHRY. To be sure he is. How can a man be condemned when there is no evidence against him?
ROBERT. I knew it would be so; I knew he would be acquitted: I knew he had no more done it than I had done it. And yet, for all that, all last night, through my sleep, there was such a howling
 
of a last speech in my ears I could get no rest for the sound of it.
HUMPHRY. Hold thy tongue, fool! I hate to hear the very name of it. Have I not told thee already, I'll give thee a good sound beating if thou ever speak one word of such things again.—Run and take the key of the back gate and open it.
ROBERT. Why so?
HUMPHRY. Your master is coming home by a private way to avoid the crowd, and will enter by the back gate. In the mean time I'll go and inform my    young master of the good news; for he must be quite overcome with despondency, poor boy, else he would never have rested quietly at home all this time. It is so unlike his usual stirring spirits.
ROBERT calling after Humphry as he goes off. Humphry, hark ye, Humphry!
HUMPHRY turning back. What sayest thou?
ROBERT. Did they raise a great huzza when he was acquitted; and did Master make them a low bow, and all that?

 
HUMPHRY pushing him off the Stage by the shoulders. Provoking fool! Run and open the back gate directly, or I'll make thee bow lower than thou hast a mind to.—He will be here in a few minutes.
                                         Exeunt severally. SCENE III. A small Court or Garden behind Arden's House. Enter Madaline from the house. MADALINE looking about. I thought Edmond would have been here before me. What can make the child so still and inert at such a moment as this. My aunt need not have urged me to remain here to comfort him, I trow: he has kept himself out of the way of every body.
Enter Humphry . MADALINE. Come near me, good Humphry; there is a thing I should have asked at thee sooner: did your Master know nothing of Robinair's death, till after he came into the Court?

 
HUMPHRY. No, not a whisper of it, till the witnesses on the side of the prosecution were called for.
MADALINE. And how did he look when he heard it?
HUMPHRY. So astonished, at first, that his face became pale with astonishment; and one would have believed it was a witness on his own side that was lost. But soon after, I warrant ye, there was a wonderful change in his behaviour.
MADALINE. How so?
HUMPHRY. Why, now, to make it clear to you, Ma'am; seeing him before he heard it, and seeing him afterwards, was, according to my notion, like seeing a man crossing over a river lately frozen, with his half-bended body, picking a step here,    and picking a step there, while the ice is bending and cracking round him on every side, and then seeing him when he gets fairly to the shore, lifting up his head, looking round him again, and standing upright and firmly on his legs, like a pillar.
MADALINE. And Mrs. Arden—how did she receive the news of his acquittal? It grieved me not to be
 
with her; but she had beseeched me so earnestly to remain here with her son, that I was constrained to obey her.
HUMPHRY. I thought so, Ma'am; for in truth she wanted a friend to be with her very much.
MADALINE. Ah! I fear she did. How was it, Humphry?
HUMPHRY. I carried her the news myself. Three steps brought me from the Court to the room where she waited; and had I been threescore and ten, I should not, I believe, have made more of them.
MADALINE. And how did she receive it?
HUMPHRY. O! fainted away like a corse.
MADALINE. Indeed! O, that I had been with her! Did you tell her of Robinair's death, too?
HUMPHRY. Yes, Ma'am, after she was somewhat recovered, I told her; but I had as lief have held my    tongue.
MADALINE. Why so, my good Humphry?

 
HUMPHRY. Truly, I thought she would have been glad on't, knowing so well that she disliked the man for drawing in her poor husband into so many ruinous courses; but, contrarywise, she looked terrified when she heard it, and has worn a face of a marvellous thoughtful, gloomy cast ever since.—But here comes the coach up the lane. Listening. They will be here in a trice.
MADALINE. And Edmond not yet come down to receive them: how strange! I thought an arrow from the bow would not have been swifter than he to meet his father. Indeed I wondered much that he did not rouse himself to attend his mother this morning; but his remissness now is astonishing. —The carriage comes no nearer.
HUMPHRY listening. No; it is not them. It has turned into another lane; and Mr. Edmond will be down stairs before they come.
MADALINE. I hope so. Who would have thought such a brave, spirited boy would have been so deeply depressed with misfortune?
HUMPHRY. I have my own notions about that.

 
MADALINE. Your own notions?
HUMPHRY.    Don't look frightened, Madam. I watched by him last night, after his return, and from his tossings and restlessness, and some strange words which he uttered, as if in a kind of agony, once or twice, I shrewdly suspect the poor boy was at a fortune-teller's, to enquire about his father's doom, and that he was frightened with some horrid sight or other.
MADALINE. Think you so?
HUMPHRY I am almost sure of it. Those cursed hags make people run mad sometimes with the sights they raise up before them.
MADALINE. I have heard of such things in the country, in days gone by, but now—
HUMPHRY. But the days of London wickedness never go by; and if they have unsettled the brain of that noble boy, burning at the stake is too good for them.
MADALINE. Nay, you are savage.

 
HUMPHRY. Oh, Ma'am! had you heard what I heard! He gave one groan so deep and so terrible, that I started up and pulled the coverlet off him, to see whether there was not a man under it, so impossible it seemed that a boy should have strength to utter such a sound.
MADALINE.    And did you question him?
HUMPHRY. I tried to do it, Ma'am; but whenever I began to speak, he looked so sternly at me that I dared not persist.—Blessed child! I never saw him look sternly on any one before.
MADALINE. And had you no conversation with him at all the whole night?
HUMPHRY. No, none. Whenever I said any thing, he covered up his face quickly with the bed-clothes, as if he were going to sleep; and so I could draw nothing from him, good or bad.
MADALINE. There is something very strange in all this: I cannot understand it.—But, hark! there comes the carriage now.

 
HUMPHRY. Ay, it is it; I know the sound of it well. It is at hand—it stops.
                                         Runs and opens a small gate at the bottom of the Stage, and enter Arden and Mrs. Arden , who both receive the embraces of Madaline . ARDEN looking about. So, Madaline, you are the first to meet us.— Ha! here he is.
Enter Young Arden , who runs to his father, and throwing himself upon his neck, bursts into tears. ARDEN. My son!
YOUNG ARDEN. My father!
ARDEN. Yes, Edmond, I will now, indeed, be thy father; and to be worthy of thee and of thine excellent mother, will be the business of my future life. Thy noble nature shall not be put to pain for me any more. I shall see thee virtuous    and happy: that will be my portion in this world, and worth all that my folly and extravagance have deprived me of.

 
YOUNG ARDEN. See me happy, father!—Oh, oh! be happy yourself, and think not of that.
ARDEN. How so, boy? Shalt thou not be happy?
MRS. ARDEN taking her son's hand tenderly. Shalt thou not be happy with us, my son? Shall thy father and I, united as we may now be in sober domestic peace, not have the blessedness of seeing thee happy?
YOUNG ARDEN with kindled animation. Yes, mother; you shall see it: you shall see me happy. I shall look upon my father and you in your domestic peace, and feel a kind of fearful happiness.
MRS. ARDEN. O! what words are these?
ARDEN. Let us go into the house. I must be alone with thee, Edmond: I must strain thee to my yearning heart in privacy.
As they are about to go into the house, a party of men burst in upon them from the small gate, which has been left unlocked, and lay hold of Young Arden . FIRST MAN. Stop, Sir; you are our prisoner: we take you
 
into custody in the king's name.  Mrs. Arden shrieks, and is supported from falling by Madaline .
ARDEN catching hold of his Son, to pull him from the men. You must be mistaken, friends; you can have no warrant against a boy like this!
FIRST MAN. Read there: it is our warrant against Edmond Arden, junior.
ARDEN looking at the warrant. O God! Rushing upon the men. Ye shall    take my life before ye seize him!
HUMPHRY. And mine too, before you touch a hair of his head! Brandishing his stick, and rushing furiously upon the men, who keep hold of Young Arden .
FIRST MAN. Dare ye resist the king's officers? Drawing a hanger from his side.
HUMPHRY. Ay, or the devil's either! What care I for the flashing of your steel?
                                         A violent struggle ensues between Humphry and Arden on one side, and the officers of justice on the other, in which Young Arden , between the two parties, is wounded.
 
YOUNG ARDEN. Oh! I am slain! Give over, dear father: fight no more for me, my brave Humphry.
                                         A general outcry and panic; and they all close about him, Arden supporting him as he sinks to the ground, and Mrs. Arden kneeling by him distractedly. MRS. ARDEN. Slain! O! no, no, no! Thou art wounded, love, but not slain: Heaven will not suffer such cruelty.—Run, O run for assistance immediately!
YOUNG ARDEN. My dear, dear mother! nothing can save me.
MRS. ARDEN. Say not so. No, no! thou wilt be saved.
YOUNG ARDEN. There is sure and speedy death in this wound: I feel it, and I am glad of it. Move me not from this spot; torment me not with any vain assistance, but let me quietly go where I ought to go—where I wish to go; for it is not meet that I should live.
MRS. ARDEN. No, no! thou shalt live! I will breathe my soul into thee; I will encircle thee, and grow into thee with the warm life of a mother. Death shall not tear thee from me!

 
YOUNG ARDEN. Alas! my own dear mother! wring not your hands so wildly.
MRS. ARDEN.    Wo is me! In the very blossom of thy youth! thou pride—thou flower of my bosom!
YOUNG ARDEN. How many mother's sons, not much older than me, die far distant on the ocean, on the field of battle, with many terrible wounds; and here I am beside you, mother, and shall look upon you, and keep hold of your hand till the last.—My father; where are you? Give me your hand. Taking Arden's hand, and joining it with his wife's. There, mother; I have earned him for you, and he will take care of you.—Will you not now be united in steady unbroken affection? This cheers me; this makes death almost pleasant to me.
ARDEN. My boy! my noble sacrificed boy! this is agony.
YOUNG ARDEN. Say not so, father! Mourn for me, but let it not be with this bitter grief. I am not sorry to die. I have, I fear, offended my great and awful Father; but I have prayed to Him to punish and forgive me. This is my punishment, and
 
I know by it that He has heard my prayer. O may He bless and pity you when I am gone! —But there is something I must say while I can speak.
ARDEN. What is it, my love?
YOUNG ARDEN.    The men that arrested me—let them come near. To the men. Be ye witnesses that with my dying breath I confess myself guilty of Robinair's death, and solemnly declare no creature but myself had any knowledge of it.—My strength goes fast; but this hand and this hand pressing his father and mother's hands are still warm in my grasp. Who else stands near who has loved me?—You, cousin, you have been very good to me; and, if I had strength, I would thank you.
MADALINE. My dear, dear Edmond! I love not my own brother better than thee: how shall I bear to think of thy sad end!
YOUNG ARDEN. And Humphry too; where art thou? Give me thine honest hand.
HUMPHRY. Oh, my dear young master! I would have laid down my life to save yours.

 
YOUNG ARDEN. I know thou hast loved me well—better than I deserved. If I had lived to be a man, we should never have parted.—Wilt thou live with my father and mother when I am gone?—No, no! this is not right; I do not ask it. Thou wilt find some master who is able to reward thee as thou deservest.
HUMPHRY.    But I will live with them! ay, beg with them —starve with them. O, pardon me! it is not want of respect that makes me speak so.—Yes, I will serve them, for your sake, as I would serve no other master on earth, were he as rich as a prince.
YOUNG ARDEN. This comes over my heart! My eyes are dark now;—lay me back a little. Groans. Be not unhappy if I groan somewhat. The pain—
MRS. ARDEN. Alas, my dear love! art thou in great pain?
YOUNG ARDEN. No, mother; it is killing me now, but it is not very bad. Farewell, farewell! Dies.
                                          Mrs. Arden sinks down in a state of insensibility by the body, while Arden paces about in an agony of despair.
 
ARDEN. Fool, fool, fool! vain, selfish, detestable fool! this is the end of thy vanity and extravagance; of thy contemptible ambition and thirst for distinction. —Thou art distinguished enough now, —the curse of Heaven is on this miserable head! Beating his forehead, and striding across the Stage; while the Curtain drops.
NOTES

ARDEN
BRUTON
FIRST MAN
GAOLER
HUMPHRY
JUSTICE
LABOURER
MADALINE
MORGAN
MRS. ARDEN
OMNES
ROBERT
ROBINAIR
SECOND MAN
SERVANT
SKRIEVER
STRANGER
UNDER GAOLER
YOUNG ARDEN

____________________________________________________________


Full text: THE TRYAL: A COMEDY.
 
Front matter  PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Mr. Withrington.
Mr. Harwood.
Sir Loftus Prettyman.
Mr. Opal.
Mr. Royston.
Humphry.
Jonathan.
Thomas.
Servants, &c.
WOMEN. Agnes , Niece to Withrington.
Mariane , Niece to Withrington.
Miss Eston.
Mrs. Betty , Maide to Agnes.
Scene in Bath, and in Mr. Withrington's house, in the environs of Bath.
 
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. Mr. Withrington's house: Enter Withrington and his two Nieces hanging upon his arms, coaxing him in a playful manner as they advance towards the front of the Stage. With. Poo, poo, get along, young gipsies, and dont teaze me any more.
Ag. So we will, my good sir, when you have granted our suit.
Mar. Do, dear uncle, it will be so pleasant!
With. Get along, get along. Dont think to wheedle me into it. It would be very pleasant, truly, to see an old fellow, with a wig upon his bald pate, making one in a holy-day mummery with a couple of mad caps.
Ag. Nay, dont lay the fault upon the wig, good sir, for it is as youthful, and as sly, and as saucy looking as the best head of hair in the county. As for your old wig indeed, there was so much curmudgeon-like austerity about it, that young people fled from before it, as, I dare say, the birds do at present, for I am sure that it is stuck up in some cherry orchard, by this time, to frighten the sparrows.

 
With. You are mistaken, young mistress, it is up stairs in my wig-box.
Ag. Well I am glad it is any where but upon your pate, uncle. Turning his face towards Mariane. Look at him, pray! is he not ten years    younger since he wore it? Is there one bit of an old grumbler to be seen about him now?
Mar. He is no more like the man he was than I am like my god-mother. Clapping his shoulder. You must even do as we have bid you, sir, for this excuse will never bring you off.
With. Poo, poo, it is a foolish girl's whimsy: I'll have nothing to do with it.
Ag. It is a reasonable woman's desire, gentle guardian, and you must consent to it. For if I am to marry at all, I am resolved to have a respectable man, and a man who is attached to me, and to find out such a one, in my present situation, is impossible. I am provoked beyond all patience with your old greedy lords, and match-making aunts, introducing their poor noodle heirs-apparent to me, like so many dolts dressed our for a race ball. Your ambitious esquires, and proud obsequious baronets are intolerable, and your rakish younger brothers are nauseous: such creatures only surround me, whilst men of sense keep at a distance, and think me as foolish as the company I keep. One would swear I were made of amber, to attract all the dust and chaff of the community.
With. There is some truth in this 'faith.
Ag.    You see how it is with me: so my dear
 
loving good uncle Coaxing him do let Mariane take my place for a little while. We are newly come to Bath, no body knows us: we have been but at one ball, and as I went in plain dress, and Mariane looks so much better than me, she has already been mistaken for the heiress, and I for her portionless cousin: I have told you how we shall manage it, do lend us your assistance!
With. So in the disguise of a portionless spinster, you are to captivate some man of sense, I suppose.
Ag. I would fain have it so.
With. Go, go, thou art a fool, Agnes! who will fall in love with a little ordinary girl like thee? why there is not one feature in thy face that a man would give a farthing for.
Mar. You are very saucy, uncle.
Ag. I should despair of my beauty to be sure, since I am reckoned so much like you, my dear uncle; yet old nurse told me that a rich lady, a great lady, and the prettiest lady that ever wore silk, fell in love, once on a time, with Mr. Anthony, and would have followed him to the world's end too, if it had not been for an old hunks of a father,    who deserved to be drubed for his pains. Don't you think he did, sir?
With. endeavouring to look angry. Old nurse is a fool, and you are an impudent hussy. I'll hear no more of this nonsense. Breaks from them and goes towards the door: they run after him, and draw him back again.

 
Ag. Nay, good sir, we have not quite done with you yet: grant our request, and then scamper off as you please.
Mar. I'll hold both your arms till you grant it.
With. to Mar. And what makes you so eager about it, young lady? you expect, I suppose, to get a husband by the trick. O fy, fy! the poorest girl in England would blush at such a thought, who calls herself an honest one.
Ag. And Mariane would reject the richest man in England who could harbour such a suspicion. But give yourself no uneasiness about this, sir, she need not go a husband-hunting, for she is already engaged.— Mariane looks frightened, and makes signs to Agnes over her uncle's shoulder, which she answers with a smile of encouragement.
With. Engaged! she is very good, truly, to manage all this matter herself, being afraid to give me any trouble, I suppose. And pray what fool has she picked out from the herd, to enter into this precious engagement with!
Ag. A foolish enough fellow to be sure, your    favourite nephew, cousin Edward.
With. Hang, the silly booby! how could he be such an ideot? but it can't be, it shan't be,—it is folly to put myself into a passion about it. To Mariane, who puts her hand on his shoulder to soothe him. Hold off your hands, ma'am. This is news indeed to amuse me with of a morning.
Ag. Yes, uncle, and I can tell you more news;
 
for they are not only engaged, but as soon as he returns from abroad they are to be married.
With. Well, well, let them marry, in the devil's name, and go a begging if they please.
Ag. No, gentle guardian, they need not go a begging; they will have a good fortune to support them.
With. Yes, yes, they will get a prize in the lottery, or find out the philosopher's stone, and coin their old shoes into guineas.
Ag. No, sir, it is not that way the fortune is to come.
With. No; he has been following some knighterrant then, I suppose, and will have an island in the South Sea for his pains.
Ag. No, you have not guessed it yet. Stroaking his hand gently. Did you ever hear of a good, kind, rich uncle of theirs, the generous Mr. Withrington?    he is to settle a handsome provision upon them as soon as they are married, and leave them his fortune at last.
With. lifting up his hands. Well, I must say thou art the impudentest little jade in the kingdom. But did you never hear that this worthy uncle of theirs, having got a new wig, which makes him ten years younger than he was, is resolved to embrace the opportunity, and seek out a wife for himself?
Ag. O! that is nothing to the purpose; for what I have said about the fortune must happen, though he should seek out a score of wives.

 
With. Must happen! but I say it shall not happen. Whether should you or I know best?
Ag. Why me, to be sure.
With. Ha, ha, ha! how so baggage?
Ag. resting her arm on his shoulder, looking archly in his face. You don't know perhaps, that when I went to Scotland last summer, I travelled far, and far, as the tale says, and farther than I can tell, till I came to the Isle of Sky, where every body has the second sight, and has nothing to do but tear a little hole in a tartan plaidy, and peering through it, in this manner, sees every thing past, present, and to come. Now, you must know,    I gave an old woman half a crown and a roll of tobacco for a peep or two through her plaid, and what do you think I saw, uncle;
With. The devil dancing a hornpipe, I suppose.
Ag. There was somebody dancing to be sure, but it was not the devil though. Who do you think it was now?
With. Poo, poo!
Ag. It was uncle himself, at Mariane's wedding, leading down the first dance, with the bride. I saw a sheet of parchment in a corner too, signed with his own blessed hand, and a very handsome settlement it was. So he led down the first dance himself, and we all followed after him, as merry as so many hay-makers.
With. Thou hast had a sharp sight, faith!
Ag. And I took a second peep through the plaidy, and what do you think I saw then, sir?

 
With. Nay, prate on as thou wilt.
Ag. A genteel family house, where Edward and Mariane dwelt, and several little brats running up and down in it. Some of them so tall, and so tall, and some of them no taller than this. And there came good uncle amongst them, and they all flocked about him so merrily! every body was so    glad to see him, the very scullions from the kitchen were glad; and methought he looked as well pleased himself as any of them. Don't you think he did, sir?
With. Have done with thy prating.
Ag. I have not done yet, good sir; for I took another peep still, and then I saw a most dismal changed family indeed. There was a melancholy sick bed set out, in the best chamber, every face was sad, and all the children were weeping. There was one dark eyed rogue amongst them, called little Anthony, and he threw away his bread and butter, and roared like a young bull, for woe's me! old uncle was dying. Observing Withrington affected. But old uncle recovered though, and looked as stout as a veteran again. So I gave the old woman her plaidy, and would not look through any more.
With. Thou art the wildest little witch in the world, and wilt never be at rest till thou hast got every thing thine own way, I believe.
Ag. I thank you, I thank you, dear uncle! leaping round his neck, it shall be even so, and I shall have my own little boon into the bargain.

 
With. I did not say so.
Ag.    But I know it will be so, and many thanks to you, my dear good uncle! Mariane ventures to come from behind,—Withrington looks gently to her, she holds out her hand, he hesitates, and Agnes joins their hands together, giving them a hearty shake.
With. Come, come, let me get away from you now: you are a couple of insinuating gipsies.
                                          Exit , hastily. Mar. embracing Agnes. Well, heaven bless thee, my sweet Agnes! thou hast done marvels for me. You gave me a fright though; I thought we were ruined.
Ag. O! I knew I should get the better of him some way or other. What a good worthy heart he has! you dont know how dearly I love this old uncle of ours.
Mar. I wonder how it is. I used to think him severe and unreasonable, with his fiddle faddle fancies about delicacy and decorum; but since you came amongst us, Agnes, you have so coaxed him, and laughed at him, and played with him, that he has become almost as frolicksome as ourselves.
Ag. Let us set about our project immediately, No body knows us here but lady Fade and Miss Eston: We must let them both into the secret: Lady Fade is confined with bad health, and though Miss Eston, I believe, would rather tell a secret than hold her tongue, yet as long as there are streets and carriages, and balls and ribbons, and parlours
 
   and pantries to talk of, there can be no great danger from her.
Mar. O! we shall do very well. How I long to frolick it away, in all the rich trappings of heirship, amongst those sneaking wretches the fortune-hunters! They have neglected me as a poor girl, but I will play the deuce amongst them as a rich one.
Ag. You will acquit yourself very handsomely, I dare say, and find no lack of admirers.
Mar. I have two or three in my eye just now, but of all men living I have set my heart upon humbling Sir Loftus. He insulted a friend of mine last winter, to ingratiate himself with an envious woman of quality, but I will be revenged upon him, O! how I will scorn him, and toss up my nose at him! I hate him like a toad.
Ag. That is not the way to be revenged upon him, silly girl! He is haughty and reserved in his manners; and though not altogether without understanding, has never suffered a higher idea to get footing in his noddle than that of appearing a man of consequence and fashion, and though he has no happiness but in being admired as a fine gentleman, and no existence but at an assembly,    he appears there with all the haughty gravity, and careless indifference of a person superiour to such paltry amusements. Such a man as this must be laughed at, not scorned, familiarity and contempt must be his portion.
Mar. He shall have it then. And as for his
 
admirer and imitator, Jack Opal, who has for these ten years past, so successfully performed every kind of fine gentlemanship, which every new fool brought into fashion, any kind of bad treatment, I suppose, that happens to come into my head will be good enough for him.
Ag. Quite good enough. You have set him down for one of your admirers too?
Mar. Yes, truly, and a great many more besides.
Ag. Did you observe in the ball-room last night, a genteel young man, with a dark grey eye, and a sensible countenance, but with so little of the foppery of the fashion about him, that one took him at a distance for a much older man?
Mar. Wore he not a plain brownish coat? and stood he not very near us great part of the evening?
Ag. Yes, the very same. Pray endeavour to attract him, Mariane.
Mar. If you are very desirous to see him in    my train, I'll try him.
Ag. No, not desirous, neither.
Mar. Then wherefore should I try?
Ag. Because I would have you try every art to win him, and I would not have him to be won.
Mar. O! I comprehend it now! This is the sensible man we are in quest of.
Ag. I shall not be sorry if it proves so. I have enquired who he is, as I shall tell you by and by, and what I have learned of him I like. Is not his appearance prepossessing, cousin Mariane?

 
Mar. I dot know, he is too grave and dignified for such a girl as thou art; I fear we shall waste our labour upon him.
Ag. But he does not look always so. He kept very near me, if it did not look vain I should say followed me all the evening, and many a varied expression his countenance assumed. But when I went away arm in arm with my uncle, in our usual good humoured way, I shall never forget the look of pleasant approbation with which he followed me. I had learnt but a little while before the mistake which the company made in regard to us, and at that moment the idea of this project came across my mind like a flash of lightning.
Mar.    Very well, gentle cousin; the task you assign me is pleasing to my humour; and the idea of promoting your happiness at the same time will make it delightful. Let me see, how many lovers shall I have, one, two, three. Counting on her fingers.
Ag. I can tell you of one lover more than you wot of.
Mar. Pray who is he?
Ag. Our distant cousin the great 'squire, and man of business, from—shire, he writes to my uncle that he will be in Bath to-day, upon business of the greatest importance, which he explains to him in three pages of close written paper; but whether it is to court me for himself, or for his son, or to solicit a great man, who is here, for a place, no mortal on earth can discover.

 
Mar. Well, let him come, I shall manage them all. O! if my Edward were here just how, how he would laugh at us!
Enter Servant . Ser. Miss Eston.
Mar. Let us run out of her way, and say we are not at home. She will sit and talk these two hours.
Ag. But you forgot we have something to say to her. To the servant. Shew her up stairs to my dressing-room.
                                          Exit servant. Mar.    Pray let us run up stairs before her, or she will arrest us here with her chat.
                                         Exeunt. Miss Eston without. And it is a very bad thing for all that; I never could abide it. I wonder your master don't stop Enters walking straight across the stage, still speaking up those nasty chinks, there is such a wind in the hall, 'tis enough to give one a hoarseness. Bye the bye Mrs. Mumblecake is sadly to-day; has your lady sent to enquire for her William? I wonder if her  Exit , still talking without old coachman has left her; I saw a new face on the, &c. &c.

 
SCENE II. The fields before Mr. Withrington's house. Enter Agnes, Mariane , and Miss Eston , who seems still busy talking, from the house, and passing over the Stage arm in arm, Exeunt. Enter, by the same side by which they went out, Sir Loftus Prettyman , and Harwood , who stands looking behind him, as if he followed something with his eyes very eagerly. Sir Loft. Advancing to the front of the stage, and speaking to himself. How cursedly unlucky this is now! if she had come out but a few moments sooner, I should have passed her walking arm in arm with a British peer. How provokingly these things always happen with me; observing Harwood. What! is he staring after her too? aloud What are you looking at, Harwood? does she walk well?
Har. I can't tell how she walks, but I could stand and gaze after her till the sun went down upon me.
Sir Loft. She is a fine woman, I grant you.
Har. vastly pleased. I knew she would please, it is impossible she should not! There is something so delightful in the play of her countenance, it would even make a plain woman beautiful.
Sir Loft. She is a fine woman, and that is no despicable praise from one who is accustomed to the elegance of fashionable beauty.

 
Har. I would not compare her to any thing so trifling and insipid.
Sir Loft. She has one advantage which fashionable beauty seldom possesses.
Har. What do you mean?
Sir Loft. A large fortune.
Har. looking disappointed.    Poo, it is not the heiress I mean.
Sir Loft. Is it t'other girl you are raving about, she is showy at a distance, I admit, but as awkward as a dairy maid when near you; and her tongue goes as fast as if she were repeating a pater noster.
Har. What, do you think I am silly enough to be caught with that magpie?
Sir Loft. Who is it then, Harwood? I see no body with Miss Withrington but Miss Eston, and the poor little creature her cousin.
Har. Good god! what a contemptible perversion of taste do interest and fashion create! But it is all affectation. Looking contemptuously at him.
Sir Loft. smiling contemptuously in return. Ha, ha, ha! I see how it is with you, Harwood, and I beg pardon too. The lady is very charming, I dare say; upon honour I never once looked in her face. She is a dependant relation of Miss Withrington's, I believe: now I never take notice of such girls, for if you do it once they expect you to do it again. I dont choose that every little creature should say she is acquainted with Sir Loftus Prettyman; I am sparing of my attentions,
 
   that she on whom I really bestow them may have the more reason to boast.
Har. You are right, Prettyman, she who boasts of your attentions should receive them all herself, that nobody else may know how little worth they are.
Sir Loft. You are severe this morning, Mr. Harwood, but you do not altogether comprehend me, I believe. I know perhaps more of the polite world than a studious templar can be supposed to do, and I assure you, men of fashion, upon this principle, are sparing of their words too, that they may be listened to more attentively when they do speak.
Har. You are very right still, Sir Loftus, for if they spoke much, I'll be hang'd if they would get any body to listen to them at all.
Sir Loft. haughtily. There is another reason why men of fashion are not profuse of their words, inferior people are apt to forget themselves, and despise what is too familiar.
Har. Dont take so much pains to make me comprehend that the more fools speak the more people will despise them; I never had a clearer conviction of it in my life.
Sir Loft. haughtily.    Good morning, sir, I see Lord Saunter in the other walk, and I must own I prefer the company of one who knows, at least, the common rules of politeness.
                                         Exit. Har. alone. What a contemptible creature it is! He would prefer the most affected ideot, who
 
boasts a little fashion or consequence, as he calls it, to the most beautiful native character in the world. Here comes another fool, who has been gazing too, but I will not once mention her before him.
Enter Opal . Op. Good morning, Harwood, I have been fortunate just now! I have met some fine girls, 'faith!
Har. I am glad you have met with any thing so agreeable; they are all equally charming to you, I suppose.
Op. Nay, Harwood, I know how to distinguish. There is a little animated creature amongst them, all life and spirit, on my soul I could almost be in love with her.
Har. Ha! thou hast more discernment than I reckoned upon. If that goose, Sir Loftus, did not spoil thee, Jack, thou would'st be a very good fellow after all. Why I must tell you, my good Opal, that lady whom you admire, is the sweetest    little gipsey in England.
Op. Is she indeed? I wish I had taken a better look of her face then; but she wears such a cursed plume of blue feathers nodding over her nose, there is scarcely one half of it to be seen.
Har. staring at him with astonishment. As I breathe! he has fallen in love with the magpie!
Op. And what is so surprising in this pray? Does not all the world allow Miss Withrington the heiress to be a fine woman?

 
Har. That is not the heiress, Jack, pointing off the stage the tall lady in the middle is she. But if your Dulcinea could coin her words into farthings, she would be one of the best matches in the kingdom.
Op. Pest take it! she was pointed out to me as Miss Withrington. Pest take my stupidity! the girl is well enough, but she is not altogether—
                                         Mumbling to himself. Har. So you bestowed all your attention on this blue feathered lady, and let the other two pass by unnoticed.
Op. No, not unnoticed neither: Miss Withrington is too fine a figure to be overlooked any where, and for the other poor little creature, who hung upon her arm so familiarly, I could not help    observing her too, because I wondered Miss Withrington allowed such a dowdy looking thing to walk with her in publick. Faith? Prettyman and I locked a vulgar looking devil up in the stable the other morning, who insisted upon going with us to the pump-room: men of fashion, you know, are always plagued with paltry fellows dangling after them.
Har. Hang your men of fashion! mere paltry fellows are too good company for them.
Op. Damn it, Harwood! speak more respectfully of that class of men to whom I have the honour to belong.
Har. You mistake me, Opal, it was only the men of fashion I abused, I am too well bred to
 
speak uncivilly in your presence of the other class you mentioned.
Op. I scorn your insinuation, sir; but whatever class of men I belong to, I praise heaven, I have nothing of the sour plodding book-worm about me.
Har. You do well to praise heaven for the endowments it has bestowed upon you, Opal; if all men were as thankful as you for this blessed gift of ignorance, we could not be said to live in an ungrateful generation.
Op.    Talk away, langh at yuor own wit as much as you please, I dont mind it. I dont trouble my head to find out bons mots of a morning.
Har. You are very right, Jack, for it would be to no purpose if you did.
Op. I speak whatever comes readiest to me: I dont study speeches for company, Harwood.
Har. I hope so, Opal; you would have a laborious life of it indeed, if you could not speak nonsense extempore.
Op. Drawing himself up, and walking haughtily to the other side of the stage. I had no business to be so familiar with him. Sir Loftus is right; a reserved manner keeps impertinent people at a distance. aside—Turns about, makes a very stiff bow to Harwood, and Exit .
Har. alone. I am glad he is gone. What do I see! here Mariane, Agnes, and Miss Eston walk over the bottom of the stage, attended by Sir Loftus and Opal, and Exeunt by the opposite side. Har. looking after them. Alas, now! that such impudent
 
fellows should be so successful, whilst I stand gazing at a distance! how lightly she trips! does she not look about to me? by heaven I'll run to her! Runs to the bottom of the stage, and stops short. Oh no! I cannot do it! but see, her uncle comes this way. He look'd so kindly at her, I could not help loving him; he must be a good man, I'll make up to him, and he perhaps will join the ladies afterwards.
                                         Exit. ACT. II SCENE I. A Lodging-house. Enter Royston and Humphry , followed by Jonathan , carrying a portmanteau. Roy. What a world of business I have got upon my hands! I must set about it immediately. Come here Jonathan; I shall send you out in the first place.
Jon. Well, sir.
Roy. Take the black trunk, that is left in the hall, upon your shoulder, Jonathan, and be sure you dont run against any body with it, for that might bring us into trouble. And perhaps as you go along, you may chance to meet with some of the Duke of Bigwell's servants, or with some body who can tell you where his Grace lodges in this town, and you may enquire of them, without saying I desired you: you understand me, Jonathan?
Jon. O yes, your honour!
Roy. But first of all, however, if you see any decent
 
hair-dresser's shop in your way, desire them to send some body here for my wig; and like enough they may tell you, at the same time, where there is an honest Town cryer to be bad; I'll have Phebe's black whelp cry'd directly; and hark ye, Jonathan, you may say as though the dog were your own, you understand, they will expect such a devil of a reward else; and pri'thee man! step into the corn    market, if thou can'st find out the way, and enquire the price of oats.
Jon. Yes, please your honour, but am I to go trudging about to all these places with that great heavy trunk upon my shoulder?
Roy. No! numskull! did I not bid you carry it to the Inn, where the London stage puts up? by the bye you had better take it to the waggon— but first ask the coachman, what he charges for the carriage: you can take it to the waggon afterwards. I will suffer no man to impose upon me; you will remember all this distinctly now, as I have told it you Jonathan?
Jon. counting to himself upon his fingers O yes, your honour! I'll manage it all I warrant!
                                         Exit. Roy. What a world of business I have upon my hands, Humphry, I am as busy as a minister of state.
Re-enter Jonathan , scratching his head. Jon. La your honour! I have forgot all about his Grace, and the black whelp.
Roy. Damn your muddle pate; did not I bid
 
you enquire where his Grace lives, and if you happen to see—
Jon. Ods bodickins! I remember it every word now! and the whelp is to be call'd by the Town    cryer, just as one would call any thing that is lost.
Roy. Yes yes, go about it speedily Exit Jon.  Now in the first place, my good Humphry, I must see after the heiress I told you of, and it is a business, which requires a great deal of management too; for— Re-enter Jonathan , scratching his head. Damn that dunder-headed fool! here he is again.
Jon. Your honour wont be angry now, but hang me, if I can tell whether I am to take that there trunk, to the coach, or the waggon.
Roy. Take it to the coach—no, no, to the waggon —yes, yes, I should have said—pest take it! carry it where thou wilt, fool, and plague me no more about it. Exit Jon.  one might as well give directions to a horse-block. Now, as I was saying, Humphry, this requires a great deal of management; for if the lady dont like me, she may happen to like my son: so I must feel my way a little, before I speak directly to the purpose.
Humph. Ay, your honour is always feeling your way.
Roy. And as for the Duke, I will ply him as close as I can with solicitations in the mean time, without altogether stating my request; for if I get
 
the lady, George shall have the office, and if he    gets the lady, I shall have the office. So we shall have two chances in our favour both ways, my good Humphry.
Humph. Belike, sir, if we were to take but one business in hand at a time, we might come better off at the long run.
Roy. O! thou hast no head for business, Humphry: thou hast no genius for business, my good Humphry. smiling conceitedly.
Humph. Why, for certain your honour has a marvellous deal of wit, but I dont know how it is, nothing that we take in hand ever comes to any good; and what provokes me, more than all the rest, is, that the more pains we take about it, the worse it always succeeds.
Roy. Humph, we can't guard against every cross accident.
Humph. To be sure sir, cross accidents will happen to every body, but certes! we have more than our own share of them.
Roy. Well, dont trouble yourself about it: I have head enough to manage my own affairs, and more than my own too. Why, my lord Slumber can't even grant a new lease, nor imprison a vagabond for poaching, without my advice and direction:    did I not manage all Mr. Harebrain's election for him; and, but for one of those cursed accidents or two, had brought him in for his Borough, as neatly as my glove; nay, if his Grace and I get into good understanding together, there is no
 
knowing, but I may have affairs of the nation upon my hands; ha, ha, ha! poor Humphry, thou hast no comprehension of all this: thou think'st me a very wonderful man, dost thou not?
Humph. I must own I do sometimes marvel at your honour.
Enter Mr. Withrington . Roy. Ha! how do you do, my dear cousin! I hope I have the happiness of seeing you in good health; I am heartily rejoiced to see you, my very good sir. Shaking him heartily by the hand.
With. I thank you, sir, you are welcome to Bath, I did not expect the pleasure of seeing you here.
Roy. Why, my dear worthy sir, I am a man of so much business, so toss'd about, so harass'd with a multiplicity of affairs, that I protest, I can't tell myself one day, what part of the world I shall be in the next.
With. You give yourself a great deal of trouble, Mr. Royston.
Roy.    O! hang it! I never spare myself: I must work, to make others work, cousin Withrington; I have got a world of new alterations, going on at Royston-hall; if you would take a trip down to see them.
With. I am no great traveller, sir.
Roy. I have plough'd up the bowling-green, and cut down the elm-trees; I have built new
 
stables, and fill'd up the horse pond; I have dug up the orchard, and pull'd down the old fruit wall, where that odd little temple used to stand.
With. And is the little temple pull'd down too? pray, what has become of your Vicar's sister, Mrs. Mary? we drunk tea with her there, I remember, is she married yet? she was a very modest looking gentlewoman.
Roy. So you remember her too; well I have pull'd down every foot of it, and built a new carthouse with the bricks.—Good commodious stalls for thirty horses, cousin Withrington, they beat Sir John Houndly's all to nothing; it is as clever, a well constructed building as any in the country.
With. Has Sir John built a new house in the country.
Roy. No, no, the stables I say.
With.    O you are talking of the stables again.
Roy. But when I get the new addition to the mansion-house, finish'd, that will be the grand improvement; the best carpenters' work in the country, my dear sir, all well season'd timber from Norway.
Humph. It is part of a disputed wreck, sir, and if the law suit about the right to it turns out in my master's favour, as it should do, it will be the cheapest built house in the county; O! let his honour alone for making a bargain.
With. So you have got a law suit on your hands, Mr. Royston? I hope you are not much addicted
 
to this kind of amusement, you will find it a very expensive one.
Roy. Bless you, my good sir, I am the most peaceable creature in the world, but I will suffer no man to impose upon me.
With. smiling. But you suffer the women sometimes to do so, do you not?
Humph. No, nor the women neither, sir; for it was but t'other day that he prosecuted widow Gibson, for letting her chickens feed amongst his corn, and it was given in his honour's favour, as in right it should have been.
With. archly.    And who was adjudged to pay the expences of court, Mr. Humphry?
Humph. Ay, to be sure, his honour was obliged to pay that.
With. archly. But the widow paid swingingly for it, I suppose.
Humph. Nay 'faith, after all, they but fined her in a sixpence; yet that always shew'd, you know, that she was in the wrong.
With. To be sure, Mr. Humphry, and the sixpence would indemnify your master for the costs of suit.
Humph. Nay, as a body may say, he might as well have let her alone, for any great matter he made of it that way; but it was very wrong in her, you know, sir, to let her hens go amongst his honour's corn, when she knew very well, she was too poor to make up the loss to his honour.
With. Say no more about it, my good Humphry,
 
you have vindicated your master most ably, and I have no doubts at all in regard to the propriety of his conduct.
Humph. very well pleased. Ay, thank god, I do sometimes make shift in my poor way to edge in a word for his honour.
Roy. not so well pleased.    Thou art strangely given to prating this morning. to Humph. By the bye, cousin Withrington, I must consult you about my application to his Grace.
Humph. aside to Withrington, pulling him by the sleeve. You forget to ask for the lady, sir.
With. turning round. What did you say of his Grace?
Roy. No, no, I should—I meant—did I not say the gracious young lady your niece; I hope she is well?
With. smiling. She is very well; you shall go home with me, and visit her.
Roy. I am infinitely obliged to you, my worthy good sir, I shall attend you with the greatest pleasure; some ladies have no dislike to a good looking gentleman-like man, although he may be past the bloom of his youth, cousin? however young men do oftener carry the day, I believe, my son George is a good likely fellow, I expect him in Bath every hour, I shall have the honour of following you, my dear sir. Remember my orders Humphry.
                                         Exeunt.
 
Enter Harwood hastily, looking round as if he sought some one, and was disappointed. Har. alone. He is gone, I have miss'd the good uncle of Agnes—what is the matter with me now, that the sound of an old man's voice should agitate    me thus? did I not feel it was the sound of something which belong'd to her? in faith! I believe, if her kitten was to mew, I should hasten to hold some intercourse with it.—I can stay in this cursed house no longer, and when I do go out, there is but one way these legs of mine will carry me, the alley which leads to her dwelling—Well, well, I have been but six times there to-day already; I may have a chance of seeing her at last—I'll run after the old gentleman even now—what a delightful witch it is!
                                          Exit hastily. SCENE II. Withrington's house. Agnes and Mariane , discovered, Mariane reading a letter, and Agnes looking earnestly and gladly in her face. Ag. My friend Edward is well, I see; pray what does the traveller say for himself?
Mar. putting up the letter. You shall read it all by and by, every thing that is pleasant and kind.
Ag. Heaven prosper you both! you are happier than I am with all my fortune, Mariane, you have a right true lover.
Mar. And so have you, Agnes, my Harwood will
 
bear the trial: I have watch'd him closely, and I will venture my word upon him.
Ag. taking her in her arms. Now if thou art not deceiv'd, thou art the dearest sweet cousin on earth! Pausing and looking seriously. Ah no! it cannot be! I am but an ordinary looking girl, as my uncle says; with vivacity; I would it were so!
Enter Servant . Ser. Sir Loftus Prettyman and Mr. Opal.
Mar. I am at home. Exit Servant . I can't entertain these fools till I have put up my letter: do you receive them, I will soon return.
                                         Exit. Enter Sir Loftus and Opal dress'd pretty much alike. Sir Loftus makes a haughty distant bow to Agnes , and Opal makes another very like it. Ag. Have the goodness to be seated, sir. to Sir Loftus Pray, sir, to Opal, making a courteous motion as if she wish'd them to sit down. Miss Withrington will be here immediately. Sir Loftus makes a slight bow without speaking; Opal does the same, and both saunter about with their hats in their hands.
Ag. I hope you had a pleasant walk after we    left you, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. Looking affectedly, as if he did not understand her. I beg pardon—O! you were along with Miss Withrington. Mumbling something which is not heard.

 
Ag. to Op. You are fond of that walk, Mr. Opal, I think I have seen you there frequently.
Op. Ma'am you are very— mumbling something which is not heard, in the same manner with Sir Loftus, but still more absurd. I do sometimes walk— mumbling again.
Ag. to Sir Loft. The country is delightful round Bath.
Sir Loft. Ma'am!
Ag. Dont you think so, Mr. Opal?
Op. 'Pon honour I never attended to it. A long pause, Sir Loftus and Opal strut about conceitedly. Enter Mariane, and both of them run up to her at once, with great alacrity and satisfaction.
Sir Loft. I hope I see Miss Withrington entirely recovered from the fatigues of the morning?
Mar. Pretty well, after the fatigue of dressing too, which is a great deal worse, Sir Loftus. carelessly.
Op. For the ball, I presume?
Sir Loft. I am delighted—
Mar. addressing herself to Agnes, without attending to him. Do you know what a provoking mistake my milliner has made?
Ag. I dont know.
Sir Loft. I hope madam—
Mar. to Ag. She has made up my whole suit of    trimmings with the colour of all others I dislike.
Op. This is very provoking, indeed I would—
Mar. Still speaking to Ag. without attending to them.
 
And she has sent home my petticoat all patch'd over with scraps of gold foil, like a mayday dress for a chimney-sweeper.
Sir Loft. Thrusting in his face near Mariane, and endeavouring to be attended to. A very good comparison, ha, ha!
Op. Thrusting in his face at the other side of her. Very good indeed, ha, ha, ha!
Mar. Still speaking to Agnes, who winks at her without attending to them. I'll say nothing about it but never employ her again,
Sir Loft. going round to her other ear, and making another attempt. I am delighted, Miss Withrington.
Mar. carelessly. Are you, Sir Loftus? To Agnes. I have broken my fan, pray put it by with your own, my dear Agnes! Exit Agnes into the adjoining room, and Sir Loftus gives Opal a significant look, upon which he retires to the bottom of the stage, and, after sauntering a little there, Exit .
Sir Loft. seeming a little piqued. If you would have done me the honour to hear me, Ma'am, I should have said, I am delighted to see you dress'd, as I hope I may presume from it, you intend going to the ball to-night.
Mar. Indeed I am too capricious to know whether I do or not; do you think it will be pleasant?
Sir Loft. Very pleasant, if the devotions of a thousand admirers can make it so.
Mar. O! the devotions of a thousand admirers,
 
   are like the good will of every body, one steady friendship is worth it all.
Sir Loft. From which may I infer that one faithful adorer, in your eyes, outvalues all the thousand? Affecting to be tender. Ah! so would I have Miss Withrington to believe! and if that can be any inducement, she will find such a one there, most happy to attend her.
Mar. Will she? I wonder who this may be: what kind of man is he pray?
Sir Loft. With a conceited simper, at the same time in a pompous manner. Perhaps it will not be boasting too much to say, he is a man of fashion, and of some little consequence in the world.
Mar. Handsome and accomplish'd too, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. I must not presume, ma'am, to boast of my accomplishments.
Mar. Affecting a look of disappointment. O! lud! so it is yourself after all! I have not so much penetration as I thought. Yawning twice very wide. Bless me! what makes me yawn so? I forgot to visit my old woman, who sells the cakes, this morning that must be it. Yawning again. Do you love gingerbread, Sir Loftus? Sir Loftus bites his lip, and struts proudly away to the other side of the stage, whilst Agnes peeps from the closet, and makes signs of encouragement to Mariane.
Mar. Well, after all, I believe, it will be pleasant    enough to go to the ball, with such an accomplish'd attendant.

 
Sir Loft. Taking encouragement, and smothering his pride. Are you so obliging, Miss Withrington? will you permit me to have the happiness of attending you?
Mar. If you'll promise to make it very agreeable to me; you are fond of dancing, I suppose?
Sir Loft. I'll do any thing you desire me, but why throw away time so precious in the rough familiar exercise of dancing? is there not something more distinguished, more refined, in enjoying the conversation of those we love?
Mar. In the middle of a crowd, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. What is that crowd to us? we have nothing to do but to despise it, whilst they stare upon us with vulgar admiration, we shall talk together, smile together, attend only to each other, like beings of a superiour order.
Mar. O! that will be delightful! but dont you think we may just peep slyly over our shoulder now and then, to see whether they are admiring us? Sir Loftus bites his lips again, and struts to the bottom of the stage, whilst Agnes peeps out again from the closet, and makes signs to Mariane.
Mar. Carelessly pulling a small case from her pocket. Are not these handsome brilliants, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. Very much struck with the sparkling of the diamonds, but pretending not to look at them. Upon my word, ma'am, I am no judge of trinkets.
Mar.    They are clumsily set, I shall give them to my cousin.

 
Sir Loft. Forgetting himself. Why, ma'am, do you seriously mean—They are of a most incomparable water.
Mar. archly. I thought you had not attended to them.
Sir Loft. tenderly. It is impossible in the presence of Miss Withrington, to think of any thing but the cruelty with which she imposes silence on a heart which adores her.
Mar. Nay, you entirely mistake me, Sir Loftus, I am ready to hear you with the greatest good nature imaginable.
Sir Loft. It is a theme, perhaps, on which my tongue would too long dwell.
Mar. O! not at all, I have leisure, and a great deal of patience at present, I beg you would by no means hurry yourself.
Sir Loft. After a pause, looking foolish and embarrassed. Few words, perhaps, will better suit the energy of passion.
Mar. Just as you please, Sir Loftus, if you chuse to say it in few words I am very well satisfied. Another pause. Sir Loftus very much embarrassed.
Enter Withrington and Harwood , and Sir Loftus seems very much relieved. Sir Loft. aside Heaven be praised! they are    come.
Mar. to With. I thought you were to have brought Mr. Royston with you.
With. He left us at a shop by the way, to enquire
 
the price of turnip seed; but he will be here by-and-by, if a hundred other things do not prevent him. Bows to Sir Loftus; then turns to Harwood, and speaks as if he resumed a conversation which had just been broken off, whilst Sir Loftus and Mariane retire to the bottom of the stage. I perfectly agree with you, Mr Harwood, that the study and preparation requisite for your profession is not altogether a dry treasuring up of facts in the memory, as many of your young students conceive: he who pleads the cause of man before fellow-men, must know what is in the heart of man as well as what is in the book of records, and what study is there in nature so noble, so interesting as this?
Har. But the most pleasing part of our task, my good sir, is not the least difficult. Where application only is wanting I shall not be left behind, for I am not without ambition, though the younger son of a family by no means affluent; and I have a widow mother whose hopes of seeing me respectable, must not be disappointed. I assure you there is nothing—
                                         Listening. With. Go on, Mr. Harwood, I have great pleasure    in hearing you.
Har. I thought I heard a door move.
With. It is Agnes in the next room, I dare say, she is always making a noise.
Har. In the next room!
With. But you was going to assure me—Have the goodness to proceed.
Har. I was going to say—I rather think I said— I am sure—
                                         Listening again.
 
With. Poo! there is no body there.
Har. Well, I said—I think I told you—In faith, my good sir, I will tell you honestly, I have forgot what I meant to say.
With. No matter, you will remember it again. Ha, ha, ha! it puts me in mind of a little accident which happened to myself when I was in Lincoln's Inn. Two or three of us met one evening, to be a little cheerful together, and— Whilst Withrington begins his story, Agnes enters softly from the adjoining closet unperceived; but Harwood on seeing her, runs eagerly up to her, leaving Withrington astonished, in the middle of his discourse.
Har. to Ag. Ha! after so many false alarms, you steal upon us at last like a little thief.
Ag. And I steal something very good from you too, if you lose my uncle's story by this interruption; for I know by his face he was telling one.
With. Raillery is not always well-timed, Miss Agnes Withrington.
Ag.    Nay, do not be cross with us, sir. Mr. Harwood knew it was too good to be spent upon one pair of ears, so he calls in another to partake.
With. Get along, baggage.
Ag. So I will, uncle; for I know that only means with you that I should perk myself up by your elbow.
With. Well, two or three of us young fellows were met—did I not say—
Ag. At Lincoln's Inn. Withrington hesitates.
Har. She has named it, sir.

 
With. I know well enough it was there. And if I remember well, George Buckner was one of us. Agnes gives a gentle hem to suppress a cough.
Har. eagerly. You was going to speak, Miss Withrington?
Ag. No, indeed, I was not.
With. Well, George Buckner and two three more of us—We were in a very pleasant humour that night— Agnes making a slight motion of her hand to fasten some pin in her dress.
Har. eagerly. Do you not want something? To Agnes.
Ag. No, I thank you, I want nothing.
With. Half amused, half peevish. Nay, say what you please to one another, for my story is    ended.
Har. My dear sir, we are perfectly attentive.
Ag. Now, pray, uncle!
With. to Ag. Now pray hold thy tongue. I forgot, I must consult the Court Calendar on Royston's account. Goes to a table and takes up a red book, which he turns over.
Ag. to Har. How could you do so to my uncle? I would not have interrupted him for the world.
Har. Ay, chide me well: I dearly love to be chidden.
Ag. Do not invite me to it. I am said to have a very good gift that way, and you would soon have too much of it, I believe.
Har. O no! I would come every hour to be chidden!

 
Ag. And take it meekly too?
Har. Nay, I would have my revenge: I should call you scolding Agnes, and little Agnes, and my little Agnes.
Ag. You forget my dignity, Mr Harwood.
Har. Oh! you put all dignity out of countenance! The great Mogul himself would forget his own in your presence.
Ag. Am I, as the good folks say, such a very humbling sight? But they are going to the garden:    I am resolved to be one of the party. As she goes to join Sir Loftus and Mariane, who open a glass door leading to the garden, Harwood goes before, walking backwards, and his face turned to her. You will break your pate presently, if you walk with that retrograde step, like a dancing-master giving me a lesson. Do you think I shall follow you as if you had the fiddle in your hand?
Har. Ah, Miss Withrington! it is you who have got the fiddle, and I who must follow.
                                          Exeunt into the garden. Re-enter Sir Loftus from the Garden, looking about for his hat. Sir Loft. O! here it is.
Enter Opal . Op. What, here alone?
Sir Loft. She is in the garden, I shall join her immediately.
Op. All goes on well, I suppose?

 
Sir Loft. Why, I dont know how it is—nobody hears us? Looking round. I dont know how it is, but she does not seem to comprehend perfectly in what light I am regarded by the world; that is to say, by that part of it which deserves to be called so.
Op. No! that is strange enough.
Sir Loft. Upon my honour, she treats me with as much careless familiarity as if I were some plain neighbour's son in the country.
Op. 'Pon honour, this is very strange.
Sir Loft. I am not without hopes of succeeding; but I will confess to you, I wish she would change    her manner of behaving to me. On the word of a gentleman, it is shocking! Suppose you were to give her a hint of the consequence I am honoured with in the fashionable circles, that she may just have an idea of the respect which is paid by every well-bred person—You understand me, Opal?
Op. O! perfectly. I shall give her to know that men like us, my dear friend, are accustomed to be looked upon as a class of superiour beings.
Sir Loft. not quite satisfied. I dont know— Suppose you were to leave out all mention of yourself—Your own merit could not fail to be inferred.
Op. Well, I shall do so.
Sir Loft. Let us go the garden.                                          Exeunt. Enter Miss Eston , speaking as she enters. I have been all over the town, and here am I at
 
last quite tired to death. How do you?— Looking round. O la! there is nobody here. Mr. Opal is gone too. I'll wait till their return. Takes up a book, then looks at herself in the glass, then takes up the book again. Yawning. 'Tis all about the imagination, and the understanding, and I dont know what—I dare say it is good enough to read of a Sunday. Yawns, and lays it down. O la! I wish they would come.
Enter Royston , and takes Miss Eston for Miss Withrington . Roys. Madam, I have the honour to be your very humble servant. I hoped to have been here    sooner, but I have been so overwhelmed with a multiplicity of affairs; and you know, madam, when that is the case—
Est. Taking the word out of his mouth. One is never master of one's time for a moment. I'm sure I have been all over the town this morning, looking after a hundred things; till my head has been put into such a confusion! La, ma'am! said my millener, do take some lavender drops, you look so pale. Why, says I, I dont much like to take them, Mrs. Trollop, they a'nt always good.
Roys. No more they are, ma'am, you are very right; and if a silly fellow, I know, had taken my advice last year, and bought up the lavender drops, he would have made—
Est. Taking the word from him again. A very good fortune, I dare say. But people never will
 
take advice, which is very foolish in them, to be sure. Now I always take—
Roys. Be so good as to hear me, ma'am.
Est. Certainly, sir; For I always say if they give me advice it is for my good, and why should not I take it?
Roys. Edging in his word as fast as he can. And the damn'd foolish fellow too! I once saved him from being cheated in a horse; and—
Est.    La! there are such cheats! a friend of mine bought a little lap-dog the other day—
Roys. But the horse, madam, was—
Est. Not worth a guinea, I dare say. Why they had the impudence to palm it on my friend.
Both speaking together. Est. As a pretty little dog, which had been bred
Roys. It was a good mettled horse, and might
E. up for a lady of quality, and when she had
R. have passed as a good purchase at the money,
E. just made a cushion for it at the foot of her
R. but on looking his fore feet— Stops short, and lets her go on. own bed, she found it was all over mangy. I'm sure I would rather have a plain wholesome cat, than the prettiest mangy dog in the kingdom.
Roys. Certainly, ma'am. And I assure you the horse—for says I to the groom—
Both speaking together. Est. O! I dare say it was—and who would

 
Roys. What is the matter with this pastern,
E. have suspected that a dog bred up on pur-
R. Thomas? it looks as if it were rubbed— Stops short again, and looks at her with astonishment as she goes on talking.
E. pose for a lady of quality, should be all over so? nasty creature! It had spots upon its back as large as my watch. Taking up her watch. O la! I am half an hour after my time. My mantuamaker is waiting for me. Good morning, sir.
                                          Exit , hastily. Roys. Looking after her.    Clack, clack, clack, clack! What a devil of a tongue she has got! 'Faith! George shall have her, and I'll e'en ask the place for myself. Looking out. But there is company in the garden! I'll go and join them.
                                          Exit to the garden. ACT III. SCENE I. Mr. Witrington's house. A loud laughing without. Enter Royston , in a great rage. Roys. Ay, ay, laugh away, laugh away, madam, you'll weep by-and-by, mayhap. Pauses and listens, laughing still heard. What an infernal noise the jade makes. I wish she had a peck of chaff in her mouth, I am sure it is wide enough to hold it.

 
Enter Humphry . Humph. I have been seeking your honour every where—Lord, sir! I have something to tell you.
Roys. Confound your tales! dont trouble me with a parcel of nonsense.
Humph. Staring at him, and hearing the laughing without. For certain, your honour, there's somebody in this house merrier than you or I.
Roys. Damn you, sir! how do you know I am not merry? Go home, and do what I ordered you directly. If that fellow Jonathan is not in the way, I'll horse-whip him within an inch of his life. Begone, I say, why do you stand staring at me, like a madman?
                                         Exeunt. Enter Mariane and Agnes , by opposite sides. Mar. holding her sides. Oh how my poor sides ach! I shan't be able to laugh again for a month.
Ag. You have got rid of one lover who will scarcely attempt you a second time. I have met him hurrying through the hall, and muttering to himself like a madman. It is not your refusal of his son that has so roused him.
Mar.    No, no, he began his courtship in a doubtful way, as if he would recommend a gay young husband to my choice, but a sly compliment to agreeable men of a middle age, brought him soon to speak plainly for himself.
Ag. But how did you provoke him so?

 
Mar. I will tell you another time. It is later than I thought. Looking at her watch.
Ag. Dont go yet. How stands it with you and a certain gentleman I recommended to your notice?
Mar. O! he does not know whether I am tall or short, brown or fair, foolish or sensible, after all the pains I have taken with him: he has eyes, ears, and understanding, for nobody but you, Agnes, and I will attempt him no more. He spoke to me once with animation in his countenance, and I turned round to listen to him eagerly, but it was only to repeat to me something you had just said, which, to deal plainly with you, had not much wit in it neither. I dont know how it is, he seemed to me at first a pleasanter man than he proves to be.
Ag. Oh! say not so, Mariane! he proves to be most admirable!
Mar. Well, be it so, he cannot prove better    than I wish him to do, and I can make up my list without him. I have a love letter from an Irish baronet in my pocket, and Opal will declare himself presently.—I thought once he meant only to plead for his friend, but I would not let him off so, for I know he is a mercenary creature. I have flattered him a little at the expence of Sir Loftus, and I hope ere long to see him set up for a great man upon his own bottom.
Ag. So it was only to repeat to you something that I had been saying?
Mar. Ha! you are thinking of this still. I believe
 
indeed he sets down every turn of your eye in his memory, and acts it all over in secret.
Ag. Do you think so? give me your hand, my dear Mariane, you are a very good cousin to me— Marks every turn of mine eye! I am not quite such an ordinary girl as my uncle says—My complexion is as good as your own, Mariane, if it were not a little sun-burnt. Mariane smiles. Yes, smile at my vanity as you please, for what makes me vain, makes me so good humoured too, that I will forgive you. But here comes uncle. Skipping as she goes to meet him. O! I am light as an air-ball! Enter Mr Withrington. My dear sir, how    long you have been away from us this morning! I am delighted to see you so pleased and so happy.
With. with a very sour face. You are mistaken, young lady, I am not so pleased as you think.
Ag. O no, sir! you are very good humoured. Is'nt he, Mariane?
With. But I say I am in very bad humour. Get along with your foolery!
Ag. Is it really so? Let me look in your face, uncle? To be sure your brows are a little knit, and your eyes a little gloomy, but poo! that is nothing to be called bad humour; if I could not contrive to look crabbeder than all this comes to, I would never pretend to be ill humoured in my life. Mariane and Agnes take him by the hands and begin to play with him.
With. No, no, young ladies, I am not in a
 
mood to be played with. I can't approve of every farce you please to play off in my family, nor to have my relations affronted, and driven from my house for your entertainment.
Mar. Indeed, sir, I treated Royston better than he deserved, for he would not let me have time to give a civil denial, but ran on planning settlements and jointures, and a hundred things besides;    I could just get in my word to stop his career with a flat refusal, as he was about to provide for our descendants of the third generation. O! if you had seen his face then, uncle!
With. I know very well how you have treated him.
Ag. Dont be angry, sir. What does a man like Royston care for a refusal? he is only angry that he can't take the law of her for laughing at him.
With. Let this be as it may, I dont chuse to have my house in a perpetual bustle from morning till night, with your plots and your pastimes. There is no more order nor distinction kept up in my house, than if it were a cabin in Kamschaika, and common to a whole tribe. I can't set my nose into a room of it but I find some visitor, or showman, or millener's apprentice, loitering about: my best books are cast upon footstools and window-seats, and my library is littered over with work-bags: dogs, cats, and kittens, take possession of every chair, and refuse to be disturbed: kitchen wenches flaunt up stairs with their new top-knots
 
on, to look at themselves in the pier glasses; and the very beggar children go hopping about my hall,    with their half-eaten scraps in their hands, as though it were the entry to a work-house.
Ag. Clapping his shoulder gently. Now dont be impatient, my dear sir, and every thing shall be put into such excellent order as shall delight you to behold. And as for the beggar children, if any of them dare but to set their noses within the door, I'll—What shall I do with them, sir? Pauses and looks in his face, which begins to relent. I believe we must e'en give them a little pudding after all. Both take his hands and coax him.
With. Come, come, off hands and let me sit down. I am tired of this.
Ag. Yes, uncle, and here is one seat, you see, with no cat upon it. Withrington sits down, and Agnes takes a little stool and sits down at his feet, curling her nose as she looks up to him, and making a good humoured face.
With. Well, it may be pleasant enough, girls, but allow me to say all this playing, and laughing, and hoidening about is not gentlewomanlike, nay, I might say, is not maidenly. A high bred elegant woman is a creature which man approaches with awe and respect; but nobody would think of accosting you with such impressions, any more than if your were a couple of young female tinkers.
Ag. Dont distress yourself about this, sir, we    shall get the men to bow to us, and tremble before
 
us too, as well as e'er a hoop-petticoat or long ruffles of them all.
With. Tremble before you! ha, ha, ha! to Agnes Who would tremble before thee dost thou think?
Ag. No despicable man perhaps: What think you of your favourite, Harwood?
With. Poo, poo, poo! he is pleased with thee as an amusing and good natured creature, and thou thinkest he is in love with thee, forsooth.
Ag. A good natured creature! he shall think me a vixen and be pleased with me.
With. No, no, not quite so far gone, I believe.
Ag. I'll bet you two hundred pounds that it is so. If I win you shall pay it to Mariane for wedding trinkets, and if you win you may build a couple of alms-houses.
With. Well, be it so. We shall see, we shall see.
Mar. Indeed we shall see you lose your bet, uncle.
With. to Mar. Yes, baggage, I shall have your prayers against me I know.
Enter Servant , and announces Mr. Opal. Enter Opal . Op. to Mar. I hope I have the pleasure of seeing    Miss Withrington well this morning. Bows distantly to Withrington, and still more so to Agnes, after the manner of Sir Loftus.

 
With. Your servant, sir.
Mar. to Op. How did you like the ball last night? There was a gay, genteel looking company.
Op. With affected superiority. Excepting Lord Saunter, and Lord Poorly, and Sir Loftus, and one or two more of us, I did not know a soul in the room.
With. There were some pretty girls there, Mr. Opal?
Op. I am very glad to hear it, 'pon honour. I did not— Mumbling.
With. aside. Affected puppy, I can't bear to look at him.
                                         Exit. Mar. Assuming a gayer air as Withrington goes out. You will soon have a new beau to enrich your circle, Mr. Opal, the handsome and accomplished Colonel Beaumont. He is just returned from abroad, and is now quite the fashion at court. To Agnes. Dont you think Mr. Opal resembles him?
Ag. O! very much indeed.
Op. Bowing very graciously. Does he not resemble Sir Loftus too? I mean in his air and his manner.
Mar. O! not at all! That haughty coldness of    his is quite old fashioned now; so unlike the affable frankness so much admired in the Colonel: you have seen him I presume?
Op. I have never had that honour.

 
Mar. Then you will not be displeased at the likeness we have traced, when you do.
Op. Relaxing from his dignity, and highly pleased. The greatest pleasure of my life, ma'am, will be to resemble what pleases you. Mariane tips Agnes the wink, and she retires to the bottom of the stage.
Mar. You flatter me infinitely.
Op. Ah! call it not flattery, charming Miss Withrington! for now I will have the boldness to own to you frankly, I have been, since the first moment I beheld you, your most sincere, your most passionate admirer. Upon hon— correcting himself 'faith I have!
Mar. Nothing but my own want of merit can make me doubt of any thing Mr. Opal asserts upon his honour or his faith. Turning and walking towards the bottom of the stage, whilst Opal follows her stalking in dumb show; then Agnes joins them, and they all come forward to the front.
Ag. to Mar. How much that turn of his head puts me mind of the Colonel.
Mar. So it does, my Agnes. To Opal. Pray have the goodness to hold it so for a moment! There now, it is just the very thing. Opal holds his head in a constrained ridiculous posture, and then makes a conceited bow. His very manner of bowing too! one would swear it was the Colonel!
Ag.    Yes, only the Colonel is more familiar, more easy in his carriage.
Op. O! Ma'am! I assure you I have formerly
 
—It is my natural manner to be remarkably easy—But I— pauses.
Mar. Have never condescended to assume any other than your natural manner, I hope.
Op. O! not at all, I detest affectation; there is nothing I detest so much—But upon my soul! I can't tell how it is, I have been graver of late. I am, indeed, sometimes thoughtful.
Mar. O fye upon it! dont be so any more. It is quite old fashioned and ridiculous now. To Agnes, winking at her. Did you see my gloves any where about the room, cousin?
Op. I'll find them. Goes to look for them with great briskness.—Servant announces Miss Eston.
Op. Pest take her! I stared at her once in a mistake, and she has ogled and followed me ever since.
Enter Miss Eston , running up to Mariane and Agnes, and pretending not to see Opal, though she cannot help looking askance at him while she speaks. Est. O my dear creatures! you can't think how I have longed to see you. Mrs. Thomson kept me so long this morning, and you know she is an intolerable talker. Pretending to discover Opal O! how do you do, Mr. Opal? I declare I did not observe you!
Op. With a distant haughty bow.    I am obliged to you, ma'am.

 
Est. I did see your figure, indeed, but I mistook it for Sir Loftus.
Op. Correcting himself, and assuming a cheerful frank manner. O ma'am! you are very obliging to observe me at all. I believe Prettyman and I may be nearly of the same height. Looking at his watch. I am beyond my appointment I see. Excuse me: I must hurry away.
                                          Exit , hastily. Est. Looking after him with marks of disappointment. I am very glad he is gone. He does so haunt me, and stare at me, I am quite tired of it. The first time I ever saw him, you remember how he looked me out of countenance. I was resolved before I came not to take notice of him.
Mar. So you knew you should find him here, then.
Est. O la! one dont know of a morning who one may meet; as likely him as any body else, you know. I really wonder now what crotchet he has taken in his head about me. Do you know, last night, before twilight, I peeped past the blind, and saw him walking with slow pensive steps, under my window.
Mar. Well, what happened then?
Est. I drew in my head, you may be sure; but    a little while after, I peeped out again, and, do you know, I saw him come out of the perfumer's shop, just opposite to my dressing-room, where he had been all the while.
Mar. Very well, and what happened next?
Est. La! nothing more. But was it not very
 
odd? What should he be doing all that time in that little paltry shop? The great shop near the Circus is the place where every body buys perfumery.
Ag. No, there is nothing very odd in Mr. Opal's buying perfumes at a very paltry shop, where he might see and be seen by a very pretty lady.
Est. With her face brightning up. Do you think so? O no! you dont?
Ag. To be sure I do. But I know what is very strange.
Est. O la! dear creature! What is it?
Ag. He bought his perfumes there before you came, when there was no such inducement. Is not that very odd? Eston pauses, and looks silly.
Enter Mr. Withrington , but upon perceiving Eston, bows and retreats again. Est. Recovering herself. Ha! how do you do, Mr. Withrington? I have just seen your friend, Lady Fade. Poor dear soul! she says—
With. I am sorry, ma'am, it is not in my power    at present—I am in a hurry, I have an appointment. Your servant, ma'am.
                                         Exit. Est. Well, now this is very odd! Wherever I go, I find all the men just going out to some appointment. O, I forgot to tell you, Mrs. Thomson has put a new border to her drawing room, just like the one up stairs, Has it not a dark blue ground? To Mariane.

 
Mar. I'm sure I cannot tell, let us go up stairs and see.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE II. Before Mr. Withrington's House. Enter Harwood. Well, here I am again, yet devil take me if I can muster up resolution enough to take the knocker in my hand! What a fool was I to call twice this morning! for with what face can I now visit her again? The old gentleman will look strangely at me; the fine heiress her cousin will stare at me; nay, the very servants begin already to smile with impertinent significance, as I enquire with conscious foolishness, if the ladies are at home. Then Agnes herself will look so drolly at me—Ah! but she will look so pleasantly too!— 'Faith! I'll e'en go. Goes to the door, puts his hand up to the knocker, stops short, and turns from it again. Pauses. What a fool am I, to stand thinking about it here! If I were but fairly in the room with her, and the first salutation over, I should not care if the devil himself made faces at me. Oh no! every body is good humoured, every thing is happy that is near her! the kitten who plays by her side takes hold of her gown unchidden. How pleasant it is to love what is so blessed! I would hate the fairest womsn on earth if she were not of a sweet temper. Come away, come away, every thing favours me here, but my own foolish fancies.

 
As he goes to the door again, it opens, and enters from the house, Betty, crying, with a bundle in her hand. Bet. O dear me! O dear me!
Har.    What is the matter with you, my good girl?
Bet. I'm sure it was not my fault, and she has abused me worser than a heathen.
Har. That is hard indeed.
Bet. Indeed it is, sir; and all for a little nasty essence bottle, which was little better than a genteel kind of a stink at the best, and I am sure I did but take out the stopper to smell to it, when it came to pieces in my hand like an egg shell; if bottles will break, how can I help it; but la! sir, there is no speaking reason to my mistress, she is as furious and as ill tempered as a dragon.
Har. Dont distress yourself, Miss Agnes Withrington will make amends to you for the severity of your mistress.
Bet. She truly! she is my mistress herself, and she has abused me, O dear me—If it had been Miss Withrington, she would not have said a word to me, but Miss Agnes is so cross, and so ill natured, there is no living in the house with her.
Har. Girl, you are beside yourself.
Bet. No, sir, god be praised! but she is beside herself, I believe. Does she think I am going to live in her service to be call'd names so, and compared    to a blackamoor too? if I had been waiting maid to the queen, she would not have compared
 
me to a blackamoor, and will I take such usage from her? what do I care for her cast gowns.
Har. Well, but she is liberal to you?
Bet. She liberal! she'll keep every thing that is worth keeping to herself, I warrant; and lord pity those who are bound to live with her! I'll seek out a new place for myself, and let the devil, if he will, wait upon her next, in the shape of blackamoor; they will be fit company for one another, and if he gets the better of her for scolding, he is a better devil than I take him for: and I am sure, sir, if you were to see her—
Har. Get along! get along! your are too passionate yourself, to be credited.
Bet. I know what I know, I dont care what no body says, no more I do; I know who to complain to.
                                          Exit , grumbling. Har. alone. What a malicious toad it is! I dare say now, she has done something very provoking, I cannot bear these pert chamber-maids, the very sight of them is offensive to me.
Enter Jonathan . Jon. Good evening to your honour, can you tell me if Mr. Withrington be at home? for as how,    my master has sent me with a message to him.
Har. Impatiently. Go to the house and enquire, I know nothing about it. Jonathan goes into the house.
Har. Alone, after musing some time. That girl has put me out of all heart though, with her
 
cursed stories,—No, no, it cannot be—it is impossible!
Re-enter Jonathan from the house, scratching his head, and looking behind. Jon. 'Faith there is hot work going on amongst them! thank heaven I am out again!
Har. What do you mean?
Jon. 'Faith! that little lady, in that there house, is the best hand at a scold, saving Mary Macmurrock, my wife's mother, that ever my too blessed eyes looked upon, lord sir! going nearer him her tongue goes ting, ting, ting, as shrill as the bell of any pieman, and then, sir, going nearer him her two eyes look out of her head, as though they were a couple of glow-worms, and then sir, he, he, he! laughing, and going close up to him she claps her little hands so, as if—
Har. Shut your fool's mouth and be damn'd to you! Kicks Jonathan off the stage in a violent passion; then leans his back to a tree, and seems thoughtful for some time, and very much troubled.
Enter Agnes from the house, with a stormy look on her face. Ag. So you are still loitering here, Harwood? you have been very much amused I suppose, with the conversation of those good folks, you have talked with.
Har.    No, not much amused, madam, though
 
somewhat astonished, I own; too much astonish'd indeed, to give it any credit.
Ag. O! it is true though, I have been very cross with the girl, and very cross with everybody, and if you dont clear up that dismal face of yours, I shall be cross with you too: what could possess you to stay so long under that chesnut-tree a little while ago, always appearing as if you were coming to the house, and always turning back again?
Har. eagerly. And is it possible, you were then looking at me, and observing my motions?
Ag. Indeed I was just going to open my window and beckon to you, when that creature broke my phial of sweet essence, and put me quite out of temper.
Har. Hang the stupid jade! I could—
Ag. So you are angry too? O! well done! we are fit company for one another, come along with me, come, come, impatiently. As she turns to go something catches hold of her gown. What is this? confounded thing! Pulls away her gown in a passion, and tears it.
Har. aside. Witch that she is, she should be beaten for her humours. I will not go with her.
Ag. Looking behind.    So you wont go in with me? good evening to you then: we did want a fourth person to make up a party with us, but since you dont like it we shall send to Sir Loftus or Opal, or Sir Ulock O'Grady, or some other good creature; I dare say Sir Loftus will come.

 
Har. Half aside. Cursed Coxcomb! If he sets his snout within the door, I'll pistol him.
Ag. Overhearing him. Ha! well said! you will make the best company in the world, come along, come along, he follows her half unwillingly, why dont you offer your arm here? dont you see how rough it is? He offers his arm. Poo, not that arm. Offers her the other. Poo, not so neither, on t'other side of me.
Har. What a humoursome creature you are! I have offer'd you two arms, and neither of them will do, do you think I have a third to offer you?
Ag. You are a simpleton, or you would have half a dozen at my service.
                                          Exeunt into the house. ACT IV. SCENE I. Harwood's Lodgings. He is discovered walking about with an irregular disturbed step, his hair and dress all neglected and in disorder; he comes forward to the front of the stage. Har. I have neither had peace nor sleep since I beheld her; O! that I had never known her! or know her only such as my first fond fancy conceived her!—I would my friend were come, I will open my heart to him, he perhaps will speak comfort to me, for surely that temper must be violent indeed, which generous affection cannot subdue;
 
and she must be extravagant beyond all bounds of nature, who would ruin the fond husband who toils for her; no, no, nature makes not such, but when she sets her scowling mark upon them to warn us from our ruin. Pauses, walks up and down, then comes forward again. Insipid constitutions, good nature is a tiresome thing: passion subdued by reason is worth a score of it—and passion subdued by love?—O! that were better still! —yesterday, as I enter'd her door, I heard her name me to her cousin, with so much gentle softness in her voice, I blest her as she spoke.—Ah! if this were so, all might still be well; who would not struggle with the world, for such a creature as this— Ay, and I must struggle!—O! that this head of mine would give over thinking, but for one half hour! Rings the bell. Enter Thomas .    What brings you here, Thomas?
Thom. Your bell rung, sir.
Har. Well, well, I did want something but I have forgot it. Bring me a glass of water.  Exit Thomas. Harwood sits down by a small writing-table, and rests his head upon his hand. Re-enter Thomas, with the water. You have made good haste, Thomas.
Thom. I did make good haste, sir, lest you should be impatient with me.
Har. I am sometimes impatient with you, then? I fear indeed I have been too often so of late;
 
but you must not mind it, Thomas, I mean you no unkindness.
Thom. Lord love you, sir! I know that very well! a young gentleman who takes an old man into his service, because other gentlemen do not think him quick enough, nor smart enough for them, as your honour has taken me, can never mean to show him any unkindness, I know it well enough; I am only uneasy because I fear you are not so well of late.
Har. I thank you, Thomas, I am not very well— I am not ill neither, I shall be better. Pauses. I think I have heard you say, you were a soldier in your youth?
Thom. Yes, sir.
Har.    And you had a wife too, a woman of fiery mettle, to bear about your napsack?
Thom. Yes, sir, my little stout spirity Jane; she had a devil of a temper, to be sure.
Har. Yet you loved her notwithstanding?
Thom. Yes, to be sure, I did, as it were, bear her some kindness.
Har. I'll be sworn you did!—and you would have been very sorry to have parted with her.
Thom. Why death parts the best of friends, sir: we lived but four years together.
Har. And so, your little spirity Jane was taken so soon away from you? Give me thy hand, my good Thomas. Takes his hand and presses it.
Thom. Perceiving tears in his eyes. Lord, sir! dont be so distress'd about it; she did die, to be
 
sure, but truly, between you and I, although I did make a kind of whimpering at the first, I was not ill pleased afterwards to be rid of her; for, truly, sir, a man who has got an ill tempered wife, has but a dog's life of it at the best.—Will you have your glass of water, sir?
Har. Looking at him with dissatisfaction. No, no, take it away; I have told you a hundred times not to bring me that chalky water from the courtyard.    Turns away from him.
Enter Colonel Hardy .— Harwood signs to Thomas, and he goes out. Har. My dear Colonel, this is kind; I am very glad to see you.
Col. It is so seldom that a young fellow has any inclination for the company of an old man, that I should feel myself vain of the summons you have sent me, were I not afraid, from this dishabille, my dear Harwood, that you are indisposed.
Har. You are very good; I am not indisposed. I have indeed been anxious—I rested indifferently last night—I hope I see you well.
Col. Very well, as you may guess from the speed I have made in coming to you. These legs do not always carry me so fast; but you have something particular to say to me.
Har. I am very sensible of your friendship.— Pray, Colonel, be seated!— They sit down—a long pause.—Colonel Hardy, like one expecting to hear something; Harwood, like one who knows not how
 
to begin. —There are moments in a man's life, Colonel Hardy, when the advice of a friend is of the greatest value; particularly one, who has also been his father's friend.
Col. My heart very warmly claims both those relations to you, Harwood; and I shall be happy to advise you, as well as I am able.
Har. After another pause. I am about to    commence a laborious profession.—The mind is naturally anxious.— Pauses.
Col. But you are too capable of exercising well that profession, to suffer much uneasiness.
Har. Many a man, with talents superiour to mine, has sunk beneath the burden.
Col. And many a man, with talents vastly inferiour to yours, has borne it up with credit.
Har. Ah! What avails the head with an estranged heart!
Col. You are disgusted, then, with your profession, and have, perhaps, conceived more favourably of mine? I am sorry for it: I hoped to see you make a figure at the bar; and your mother has long set her heart upon it.
Har. With energy. O, no! she must not! she shall not be disappointed!—Pardon me, my expressions have gone somewhat wide of my meaning.—I meant to have consulted you in regard to other difficulties.—
Col. And pardon me likewise, for interrupting you; but it appears to me, that an unlearned
 
soldier is not a person to be consulted in these matters.
Har. It was not, altogether, of these matters    I meant to speak—But, perhaps, we had better put it off for the present.
Col. No, no!
Har. Perhaps, we had better walk out a little way; we may talk with less restraint as we go.
Col. No, no, there are a thousand impertinent people about. Sit down again, and let me hear every thing you wish to say.
Har. Pausing, hesitating, and much embarrassed. There are certain attachments in which a man's heart may be so deeply interested—I would say so very—or rather I should say so strangely engaged, that— hesitates and pauses.
Col. O, here it is! I understand it now. But pray dont be so foolish about it, Harwood! You are in love?
Har. Appearing relieved. I thank you quickness, my dear Colonel, I fear it is somewhat so with me.
Col. And whence your fear? Not from the lady's cruelty?
Har. No, there is another bar in my way, which does, perhaps, too much depress my hopes of happiness.
Col. You have not been prudent enough to fall in love with an heiress?
Har.    No, my dear sir, I have not.
Col. That is a great mistake, to be sure, Harwood;
 
yet many a man has not advanced the less rapidly in his profession, for having a portionless wife to begin the world with. It is a spur to industry.
Har. Looking pleased at him. Such sentiments are what I expected from Colonel Hardy; and, were it not for female failings, there would be little risk in following them.—I dont know how to express it—I am perhaps too delicate in these matters—We ought not to expect a faultless woman.
Col. No, surely; and, if such a woman were to be found, she would be no fit companion for us.
Har. Getting up, and pressing the Colonel's hand between his. My dearest friend! your liberality and candour delight me!—I do, indeed, believe that many a man has lived very happily with a woman far from being faultless; and, after all, where is the great injury he sustains, if she should be a little violent and unreasonable?
Col. Starting up from his seat. Nay, heaven defend us from a violent woman; for that is the devil himself!— Seeing Harwood's countenance change —What is the matter with you, Harwood? She is not ill temper'd, I hope?
Har. Hesitating.    Not—not absolutely so— She is of a very quick and lively disposition, and is apt to be too hasty and unguarded in her emotions. —I do not, perhaps, make myself completely understood.
Col. O! I understand you perfectly,—I have
 
known ladies of this lively disposition, very hasty and unguarded too in their demands upon a man's pocket as well as his patience; but she may be of a prudent and economical turn. Is it so, Harwood?
Har. Throwing himself into a chair very much distress'd. I do not say it is, Colonel.
Col. Putting his hand kindly upon his shoulder. I am sorry to distress you so much, my dear friend, yet it must be so. I see how it is with you: pardon the freedom of friendship, but indeed an expensive and violent temper'd woman is not to be thought of: he who marries such a one forfeits all peace and happiness. Pluck up some noble courage, and renounce this unfortunate connexion.
Har. Starting up. Renounce it, Colonel Hardy! Is it from you I receive so hard, so unfeeling a request, who have suffered so much yourself from the remembrance of an early attachment? I thought to have been pitied by you.
Col. I was early chagrined with the want of promotion, and disappointed in my schemes of    ambition, which gave my countenance something of a melancholy cast, I believe, and the ladies have been kind enough to attribute it to the effects of hopeless love; but how could you be such a ninny, my dear Harwood?
Har. I am sorry, sir, we have understood one another so imperfectly.
Col. Nay, nay, my young friend, do not carry
 
yourself so distantly with me. You have sought a love-worn companion, and you have found a plain spoken friend. I am sorry to give you pain; deal more openly with me: when I know who this bewitching creature is, I shall, perhaps, judge more favourably of your passion.
Har. It is Miss Agnes Withrington.
Col. Cousin to Miss Withrington the heiress?
Har. Yes it is she. What have I said to amaze you?
Col. You amaze me, indeed!—That little— fogive me if I were almost to say,—plain looking girl! Friendship would sympathize in your feelings; but, pardon me, Harwood, you have lost your wits.
Har. I believe I have, Colonel, which must plead my pardon, likewise, for expecting this    friendship from you.
Col. You distress me.
Har. I distress myself still more, by suffering so long the pain of this conversation.
Col. Let us end it, then, as soon as you please. When you are in a humour to listen to reason, I shall be happy to have the honour of seeing you.
Har. When I am in that humour, sir, I will not balk it so much as to intrude upon your time.
Col. Let me see you, then, when you are not in that humour, and I shall the more frequently have the pleasure of your company. Both bow coldly. Exit , Colonel Hardy.

 
Har. alone. What a fool was I to send for this man!—A little plain looking girl! What do the people mean? They will drive me mad amongst them. Why does not the little witch wear high heels to her shoes, and stick a plume of feathers in her cap? Oh! they will drive me distracted!
SCENE II. Mr. Withrington's House. Agnes discovered embroidering at a small table, Harwood standing by her, and hanging fondly over her as she works. Har. How pretty it is! Now you put a little purple on the side of the flower.
Ag. Yes, a very little shade.
Har. And now a little brown upon that.
Ag. Even so.
Har. And thus you work up and down, with that tiny needle of yours, till the whole flower is completed. Pauses, still looking at her working. Why, Agnes, you little witch! you're doing that leaf wrong.
Ag. You may pick it out then, and do it better for me. I'm sure you have been idle enough all the morning, it is time you were employed about something.
Har. And so I will. Sitting down by her, and taking hold of the work.
Ag. Covering the flower with her hand O! no, no!

 
Har. Take away that little perverse hand, and let me begin. Putting his hand upon hers.
Ag. What a good for nothing creature you are! you can do nothing yourself, and you will suffer no body else to do any thing. I should have had the whole pattern finished before now, if you had not loitered over my chair so long.
Har.    So you can't work when I look over you? Then I have some influence upon you? O you sly girl! you are caught in your own words at last.
Ag. Indeed, Harwood, I wish you would go home again to your law-books and your precedent hunting; you have mispent a great deal of time here already.
Har. Is it not better to be with you in reality than only in imagination? Ah! Agnes! you little know what my home studies are.—Law, said you! how can I think of law, when your countenance looks upon me from every black lettered page that I turn? When your figure fills the empty seat by my side, and your voice speaks to me in the very mid-day stillness of my chamber? Ah! my sweet Agnes! you will not believe what a foolish fellow I have been, since I first saw you.
Ag. Nay, Harwood, I am not at all incredulous of the fact, it is only the cause of it which I doubt.
Har. Saucy girl! I must surely be revenged upon you for all this.
Ag. I am tired of this work. Getting up.

 
Har. O! do not give over.—Let me do something    for you—Let me thread your needle for you—I can thread one most nobly.
Ag. There then. Gives him a needle and silk.
Har. Pretending to scratch her hand with it. So ought you to be punished. Threads it awkwardly.
Ag. Ay, nobly done, indeed! but I shall work no more to-day.
Har. You must work up my needleful.
Ag. I am to work a fool's cap in the corner by-and-by, I shall keep your needleful for that. I am going to walk in the garden.
Har. And so am I.
Ag. You are?
Har. Yes, I am. Go where you will, Agnes, to the garden or the field, the city or the desert, by sea or by land, I must e'en go too. I will never be where you are not, but when to be where you are is impossible.
Ag. O! there will be no getting rid of you at this rate, unless some witch will have pity upon me, and carry me up in the air upon her broomstick.
Har. There, I will not pretend to follow you, but as long as you remain upon the earth, Agnes, hang me! if I can find in my heart to budge an inch from your side.
Ag.    You are a madman.
Har. You are a sorceress.
Ag. You are an idler.
Har. You are a little mouse.

 
Ag. Come, come, get your hat then, and let us go. Aside, while he goes to the bottom of the stage for his hat. Bless me! I have forgot to be ill-humour'd all this time.
                                          Exit , hastily. Har. Coming forward. Gone for her shawl, I suppose. How delightful she is! how pleasant every change of her countenance! How happy must his life be, spent even in cares and toil, where leisure hours are cheer'd with such a creature as this!
Ag. Without, in an angry voice. Dont tell me so: I know very well how it is, and you shall smart for it too, you lazy, careless, impudent fellow! And, besides all this, how dare you use my kitten so?
Har. Who listened with a rueful face. Well, now, but this is humanity: she will not have a creature ill used.—I wish she would speak more gently though.
Ag. Entering. Troublesome, provoking, careless fellow!
Har.    It is very provoking in him to use the poor kitten ill.
Ag. So it is; but it is more provoking still to mislay my clogs, as he does.
Enter Servant , with clogs. Ser. Here they are, madam.
Ag. Bring them here, I say, looks at them. These are Miss Withrington's clogs, you blockhead! Throws them to the other side of the stage in
 
a passion. I must go without them, I find. To Harwood. What are you musing about? If you dont chuse to go with me, good morning.
Har. Sighing deeply. Ah, Agnes! you know too well that I cannot stay behind you.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE III. Miss Withrington's Dressing-room. Enter Mariane , who turns back again towards the door, and calls to Agnes without. Mar. Agnes, cousin Agnes, where are you going?
Ag. Without. I am returning to Miss Eston, whom I have left in the parlour, talking to the dog.
Mar. Well, let her talk to the dog a little longer, and let me talk to you.
Enter Agnes . Ag. I have set Betty to watch at the higher windows to give notice of Sir Loftus's approach, that we may put ourselves in order to receive him; for I am resolved to have one bout more with him, and discharge him for good, I am quite tired of him now.
Ag. Do you expect him?
Mar. I am pretty sure he will come about this time, and I must be prepared for him. I have a good mind to tell him, at once, I despise him, and that will be a plain easy way of finishing the business.
Ag. No, no, my sweet Mariane! we must send him off with eclat. You have played your part
 
very well hitherto; keep it up but for this last time, and let Eston and I go into the closet and enjoy it.
Mar. Well then, do so: I shall please you for this once.
Enter Betty , in haste. Bet. to Mar. Sir Loftus is just coming up the    side path, madam, and he'll be at the door immediately.
Ag. I'll run and bring Eston directly.
                                         Exit. Mar. Looking at the door of the closet. Yes, it is very thin: they will hear well, and see through the key hole.
Re-enter Agnes with Miss Eston , in a great hurry. Est. La! I have torn my gown in my haste.
Ag. Come along, come along.
Est. It it is not so bad a tear though as Mrs. Thomson got the—
Ag. Come, come, we must not stay here. Pushes Eston into the closet, and follows. Mariane and Betty place a table with books, and a chair, near the front of the stage.
Est. Looking from the closet. La! Mariane, how I long to hear you and him begin. I shall be so delighted!
Mar. For heaven sake shut the door! he will be here immediately. Shuts the door upon her, and continues to set the room in order.
Est. Looking out again. La! Mariane, do you know how many yards of print Lady Squat has
 
got round her new— Agnes from behind, claps her hand on Eston's mouth, and draws her into the closet.—Mariane seats herself by the table, pretending to read. Exit Betty, and enter Sir Loftus , a servant announcing him.
Sir Loft. You are very studious this morning, Miss Withrington.
Mar. Carelessly. Ha! how do you do?
Sir Loft. You have been well amus'd, I hope?
Mar. So, so. I must put in a mark here, and not lose my place. Looking on the table. There    is no paper—O, there is some on the other table: pray do fetch it me! Pointing to a table at the bottom of the stage. I am very lazy. Sits down again indolently.
Sir Loft. Fetching the paper, and presenting it with a condescending yet self-important air. I have the honour to obey you, ma'am.
Mar. I thank you; you are a very serviceable creature, I am sure.
Sir Loft. Drawing himself up proudly, but immediately correcting himself. I am always happy to serve Miss Withrington.
Mar. O! I know very well the obliging turn of your disposition. Tosses her arm upon the table, and throws down a book. I am very stupid this morning. Sir Loftus picks up the book, and gives it to her rather sulkily; and she in receiving it drops an ivory ball under the table. Bless me! What is the matter with all these things? pray lift it for me, good Sir Loftus! I believe you must creep
 
under the table for it though. He stoops under the table with a very bad grace, and she slyly gives it a touch with her foot, which makes it run to the other side of the stage. Nay, you must go further off for it now. I am very troublesome.
Sir Loft. Goes after it rather unwillingly, and presenting it to her with still a worse grace. Madam, this is more honour than I— mumbling.
Mar. O, no! Sir Loftus, it is only you that are too good. Lolling carelessly in her chair. It is so comfortable to have such a good creature by one! your fine fashionable men are admired to be    sure, but I dont know how, I feel always restrained in their company. With a good obliging creature like you now, I can be quite at my ease: I can just desire you to do any thing.
Sir Loft. Upon my honour, madam, you flatter me very much indeed. Upon my honour, I must say, I am rather at a loss to conceive how I have merited these commendations.
Mar. O! Sir Loftus, you are too humble, too diffident of yourself. I know very well the obliging turn of your disposition to every body.
Sir Loft. aside. Damn it! is she an ideot? aloud. Your good opinion, madam, does me a great deal of honour, but I assure you, ma'am, it is more than I deserve. I have great pleasure in serving Miss Withrington;—to be at the service of every body is an extent of benevolence I by no means pretend to.
Mar. Now why are you so diffident, Sir Loftus?
 
Did not old Mrs. Mumblecake tell me the other day, how you ran nine times to the apothecary's to fetch green salve to rub her monkey's tail.
Sir Loft. She told you a damn'd lie then! Biting his lip, and walking up and down with hasty strides. Damn it! this is beyond all bearing! I    run nine times to the apothecary's to fetch green salve for her monkey's tail! If the cursed hag says so again I'll bury her alive!
Mar. Nay, dont be angry about it. I'm sure I thought it very good in you, and I said so to every body.
Sir Loft. You have been so obliging as tell all the world too?
Mar. And why should not I have the pleasure of praising you?
Sir Loft. Hell and the devil! Turning on his heel, and striding up and down, and muttering as he goes, whilst she sits carelessly with her arms crossed.
Mar. My good Sir Loftus, you will tire yourself. Had you not better be seated?
Sir Loft. Endeavouring to compose himself. The influence you have over me, ma'am, gets the better of every thing. I would not have you mistake my character, however; if love engages me in your service you ought to receive it so. I have been less profuse of these attentions to women of the very first rank and fashion; I might therefore have hoped that you would lend a more favourable ear to my passion.
Mar. Indeed you wrong me. You dont know
 
how favourable my ear may be disposed: sit down here and tell me all about it. Sir Loftus revolts again at her familiarity, but stifles his pride and sits down by her.
Sir Loft.    Permit me to say, madam, that it is time we should come to an explanation of each other's sentiments.
Mar. Whenever you please, sir.
Sir Loft. Bowing. I hope then, I may be allowed to presume, that my particular attentions to you, pardon me, ma'am, have not been altogether disagreeable to you.
Mar. O! not at all, Sir Loftus.
Sir Loft. Bowing again. I will presume then, still farther, ma'am, and declare to you, that from the very day which gave birth to my passion, I have not ceased to think of you with the most ardent tenderness.
Mar. La! Sir Loftus, was it not of a Wednesday?
Sir Loft. Fretted. Upon my word I am not so very accurate: it might be Wednesday, or Friday, or any day.
Mar. Of a Friday, do you think? it runs strangely in my head that we saw one another first of a Wednesday.
Sir Loft. Very much fretted. I say, ma'am, the day which gave birth to my love—
Mar. O! very true! You might see me first of a Wednesday, and yet not fall in love with me till    the Friday. Sir Loftus starts up in a passion, and
 
strides up and down.—Mariane rising from her seat carelessly. I wonder where William has put the nuts I bought for Miss Eston's squirrel. I think I hear a mouse in the cupboard. Goes to the bottom of the room, and opens a small cupboard in the wall, whilst Sir Loftus comes forward to the front.
Sir Loft. aside. Damn her freaks! I wish the devil had the wooing of her. Pauses. I must not lose her for a trifle though; but when she is once secured, I'll be revenged! I'll vex her! I'll drive the spirit out of her. Aloud, as she comes forward from the cupboard. My passion for you, Miss Withrington, is too generous and disinterested to merit this indifference.
Mar. I'm glad they have not eat the nuts though.
Sir Loft. aside. Curse her and her nuts! I'll tame her! aloud. My sentiments for you, ma'am, are of so delicate and tender a nature, they do indeed deserve your indulgence. Tell me then, can the most disinterested, the most fervent love, make any impression on your heart? I can no longer exist in this state of anxiety! at your feet let me implore you— Seems about to kneel, but rather unwilling, as if he wished to be prevented.
Mar. Pray, Sir Loftus, dont kneel there! my maid has spilt oil on the floor.
Sir Loft. Since you will not permit me to have    the pleasure of kneeling at—
Mar. Nay, I will not deprive you of the pleasure
 
—There is no oil spilt here. Pointing to a part of the floor very near the closet door.
Sir Loft. I see it would be disagreeable to you.
Mar. I see very well you are not inclined to condescend so far.
Sir Loft. Kneeling directly. Believe me, madam, the pride, the pleasure of my life, is to be devoted to the most adorable— Mariane gives a significant cough, and Agnes and Eston burst from the closet, the door opening on the outside, comes against Sir Loftus as he kneels, and lays him sprawling on the floor.
Ag. Est. and Mar. Speaking together. O Sir Loftus! poor Sir Loftus! All coming about him, pretending to assist him to get up, but in reality hindering him.
Sir Loft. Damn their bawling! they will bring the whole family here!
Enter Mr. Withrington and Opal , and Sir Loftus, mad with rage, makes a desperate effort, and gets upon his legs. Opal stands laughing at him without any ceremony, whilst he bites his lips, and draws himself up haughtily. Mar. to Sir Loft. I'm afraid you have hurt yourself?
Sir Loft. Shortly. No, ma'am.
Ag. Hav'nt you rubbed the skin of your shins, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. No, ma'am.

 
Est. Nor off your toes, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. No, ma'am.
Ag. I'm sure he has hurt his poor dear nose, but he is ashamed to own it.
Sir Loft. Neither toes nor nose! Devil take it!
With. Get along, girls, and dont torment this    poor man any longer. I am afraid, Sir Loftus, the young gipsies have been making a fool of you.
Sir Loft. Sir, it is neither in your power nor their's to make a fool of me.
Op. Ha, ha, ha, ha! 'Faith Prettyman you must forgive me! ha, ha, ha, ha! I never thought in my life to have caught you at such low prostrations. But dont be so angry, man! though you do make a confounded silly figure, it must be confess'd. Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Sir Loft. to Op. Sir, your impertinence and yourself are equally contemptible: and I desire you would no longer take the trouble of intruding yourself into my company, nor of affronting me, as you have hitherto done, with your awkward imitation of my figure and address.
Op. What the devil do you mean? I imitate your figure and address! I scorn to—I will not deny that I may have insensibly acquired a little of them both for—for— Hesitating.
Ag. For he has observed people laughing at him of late.
Sir Loft. Turning on his heel. He is beneath my resentment.
Mar. Be not so angry, good Sir Loftus! let us
 
   end this business for the present, and when I am at leisure to hear the remainder of your declarations, which has been so unfortunately interrupted, I'll send and let you know.
Sir Loft. No, 'faith, madam! you have heard the last words I shall ever say to you upon the subject. A large fortune may make amends for an ordinary person, madam, but not for vulgarity and impertinence. Good morning. As he is going out enter Servant.
Ser. Lord Saunter, and Colonel Gorget are coming up stairs, to see how Sir Loftus Prettyman does after his fall.
Sir Loft. Hell and damnation! I'll go out by the other door.
Mar. That door is locked; you can't go that way.
Sir Loft. I'll burst it open then. Runs to the door: they all get about him to prevent him.
Sir Loft. Struggling. What, is there no getting out from this den of devils? Breaks from them, and Exit , leaving them laughing provokingly behind him.
With. Shaking his head. This is too bad, this is too bad, young ladies! I am ashamed to have all this rioting and absurdity going on in my house.
Ag. Come away, uncle, and see him go down the back walk, from the parlour windows. I'll warrant you he'll stride it away most nobly. Withrington follows, shrugging up his shoulders.
                                         Exeunt.
 
ACT V. SCENE I. Mr. Withrington's Library. Mr. Withrington discovered seated by a table. With. Who waits there? Enter Servant . Tell Miss Agnes Withrington I wish to see her.  Exit servant. What an absurd fellow this Harwood is, to be so completely bewitched with such a girl as Agnes! If she were like the women I remember, there would indeed be some— Agnes entering softly behind him, gives him a tap on the shoulder.
Ag. Well, uncle, what are you grumbling about? Have you lost your wager? Harwood has just left you, I hear.
With. I believe you may buy those trinkum, trankum ornaments for Mariane whenever you please.
Ag. Pray look not so ungraciously upon the matter! But you can't forgive him, I suppose, for being such a ninny as to fall in love with a little ordinary girl, eh?
With. And so he is a ninny, and a fool, and a very silly fellow.
Ag. Do tell me what he has been saying to you.
With. Why, he confesses thou art ill-tempered, that thou art freakish, that thou art extravagant; and that of all the friends he has spoken with upon the subject, there is not one who will allow thee    beauty enough to make a good looking pot-girl.

 
Ag. Did he say so?
With. Why, something nearly equivalent to it, Agnes. Yet, notwithstanding all this, there is something about thee so unaccountably delightful to him, that, poor as thou art, he will give up the fair hopes of opulence, and the pleasures of freedom, to watch for thee, drudge for thee, pinch himself for thee, if thou wilt have the condescension, in return, to plague and torment him for life.
Ag. Foolish enough indeed, yet heaven bless him for it! What a fortunate woman am I! I sought a disinterested lover, and I have found a most wonderful one.
With. I dare say you think yourself very fortunate.
Ag. And dont you, likewise, my good sir? but you seem displeased at it.
With. You guess rightly enough: I must speak without disguise, Agnes, I am not pleased.
Ag. Ah! his want of fortune—
With. Poo! you know very well I despise all mercenary balancing of property. It is not that which disturbs me. To be the disinterested choice of a worthy man is what every woman, who means    to marry at all, would be ambitious of; and a point in regard to her marriage, which a woman of fortune would be unwilling to leave doubtful. But there are men whose passions are of such a violent over-bearing nature, that love in them, may be considered as a disease of the mind; and the object
 
of it claims no more perfection or pre-eminence amongst women, than chalk, lime, or oatmeal may do amongst dainties, because some diseased stomachs do prefer them to all things. Such men as these, we sometimes see attach themselves even to ugliness and infamy, in defiance of honour and decency. With such men as these, women of sense and refinement can never be happy; nay, to be willingly the object of their love is disrespectable. Pauses. But you dont care for all this, I suppose? It does well enough for an old uncle to perplex himself with these niceties: it is you yourself the dear man happens to love, and none of those naughty women I have been talking of. So all is very right. Pauses, and she seems thoughtful.
Ag. Assuming a grave and more dignified air. No, sir, you injure me: prove that his love for me is stronger than his love of virtue, and I will—
With. What will you do, Agnes?
Ag. I will give him up for ever.
With.    Ay, there spoke a brave girl! you deserve the best husband in Christendom for this.
Ag. Nay, my husband-hunting will end here. If Harwood endures not the test, I will indeed renounce him, but no other man shall ever fill his place.
With. Well, well, we shall see, we shall see. Walks up and down. She is thoughtful. You are very thoughtful, Agnes; I fear I have distressed you.

 
Ag. You have distressed me, yet I thank you for it. I have been too presumptuous, I have ventured farther than I ought. Since it is so, I will not shrink from the trial. Pauses. Dont you think he will go through it honourably?
With. Shaking his head. Indeed I know not— I hope he will.
Ag. You hope? I thank you for that word, my dear sir! I hope he will too. She remains thoughtful: he takes a turn or two cross the stage.
With. Clapping her shoulder affectionately. What are you thinking of, niece?
Ag. How to set about this business.
With. And how will you do it?
Ag. I will write a letter to Lady Fade, asking pardon for having told some malicious falsehoods of her, to a relation of whom she is dependant    upon, and begging she will make up the matter, and forgive me; promising at the same time, most humbly, if she will not expose me for this time, never to offend so any more. Next time he comes I will make him direct the letter himself, that when it falls into his hands again, he may have no doubt of its authenticity. Will this do?
With. Yes, very well. If he loves you after this, his love is not worth the having.
Ag. Ah, uncle! you are very hard hearted! But you are very right: I know you are very right. Pray does not Royston lodge in the same house with Harwood?
With. He does.

 
Ag. I wish, by his means, we could conceal ourselves somewhere in his apartments, where we might see Harwood have the letter put into his hands, and observe his behaviour. I dont know any body else who can do this for us: do you think you could put him into good humour again?
With. I rather think I can, for he hath still a favour to ask of me.
Ag. We must give him a part to act; do you think he can do it?
With. He is a very blundering fellow, but he    will be so flattered with being let into the secret, that I know he will do his best.
Enter Mariane . Mar. What have you been about so long together?
With. Hatching a new plot, girl! and we set about it directly too.
Mar. I am very sure the plot is of your own hatching, then, for I never saw Agnes with any thing of this kind in her head, wear such a grave spiritless face upon it before.
With. You are mistaken, ma'am, it is of her own contrivance, but you shall know nothing about it. And I give you warning that this shall be the last of them, if you have got any more poor devils on your hands to torment, do it quickly; for I will have an end put to all this foolery. I will have my family put in order again, and well dressed people to drink tea with me, as I
 
used to have, instead of all this up and down irregular kind of living, which I abhor.
Mar. Very well, uncle, I have just been following your advice. I have discarded Sir Ullock O'Grady, and I have only now poor Opal to reward for his services. I have got a promise of marriage from him, in which he forfeits ten    thousand pounds if he draws back, I shall torment him with this a little. It was an extraordinary thing to be sure for an heiress to demand, but I told him it was the fashion; and now that he has bound himself so securely, he is quite at heart's ease, and thinks every thing snug and well settled.
Enter Royston , a Servant announcing him. With. Your servant, Mr. Royston, I am very glad to see you. Dont start at seeing the ladies with me, I know my niece, Mariane, and you have had a little misunderstanding, but when I have explained the matter to you, you will be friends with her again, and laugh at it yourself.
Roy. coldly. I have the honour to wish the ladies good morning.
With. Nay, cousin, you dont understand how it is; these girls have been playing tricks upon every man they have met with since they came here; and when that wild creature, pointing to Mariane, was only laughing at the cheat she had passed upon them all, which I shall explain to you presently, you thought she was laughing at you;
 
shake hands, and be friends with her, cousin; nobody minds what a foolish girl does.
Roy. With his face brightening up. O! for    that matter, I mind these things as little as any body, cousin Withrington. I have too many affairs of importance in my hands, to attend to such little matters as these. I am glad the young lady had a hearty laugh with all my soul; and I shall be happy to see her as merry again whenever she has a mind to it. I mind it! no, no, no!
Mar. I thank you, sir, and I hope we shall be merry again, when you shall have your own share of the joke.
Roy. Yes, yes, we shall be very merry. By the bye, Withrington, I came here to tell you, that I have got my business with the duke put into so good a train, that it can hardly misgive.
With. I am happy to hear it.
Roy. You must know I have set very artfully about it, cousin; but I dare say you would guess as much, he, he, he! You know me of old, eh? I have got Mr. Cullyfool to ask it for me on his own account; I have bribed an old house-keeper, who is to interest a great lady in my favour; I have called eleven times on his grace's half cousin, till she has fairly promised to write to my lady dutchess upon the business; I have written to the steward, and promised his son all my interest at    next election, if he has any mind to stand for our borough, you know, and I have applied by a friend—No, no, he has applied through the medium
 
of another friend, or rather, I believe, by that friend's wife, or aunt, or some way or other, I dont exactly remember, but it is a very good channel, I know.
With. O! I make no doubt of it.
Roy. Nay, my landlady, has engaged her apothecary's wife to speak to his grace's physician about it; and a medical man, you know, sometimes asks a favour with great advantage, when a patient believes that his life is in his hands. The duke has got a most furious fit of gout, and it has been in his stomach too, ha, ha, ha, ha!— If we can't succeed without it, I have a friend who will offer a round sum for me, at last, but I hope this will not be necessary. Pray, do you know of any other good channel to solicit by?
With. 'Faith, Royston! you have found out too many roads to one place already, I fear you'll lose your way amongst them all.
Roy. Nay, nay, cousin, I won't be put off so. I have been told this morning you are acquainted with Mr. Sucksop, the duke's greatest friend and    adviser. Come, come! you must use your interest for me.
With. Well, then, come into the other room, and we shall speak about it. I have a favour to ask of you too.
Roy. My dear sir, any favour in my power you may absolutely command at all times. I'll follow you, cousin. Goes to the door with Withrington with great alacrity, but, recollecting that he has forgotten
 
to pay his compliments to the ladies, hurries back again, and, after making several very profound bows to them, follows Withrington into another room.
Mar. Imitating him. Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Ag. Softly, Mariane; let us leave this room, if you must laugh, for he will overhear you.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE II. Royston's Lodgings: enter Royston , conducting in Agnes, Mariane , and Withrington . Roy. Now, pray compose yourselves, young ladies, and sit down a little. I'll manage every thing: dont give yourselves any trouble; I'll set the whole plot a going.
With. We depend entirely upon you, Royston.
Roy. I know you do, many a one depends upon me, cousin Withrington. I'll shew you how I'll manage it. Jonathan, come here, Jonathan! Enter Jonathan. Bring me that screen from the other room. Exit Jonathan. We'll place it here, if you please, cousin, and then you and the ladies can stand as snugly behind it, as kings and queens in a puppet-show, till your time comes to appear. Enter Jonathan with screen. Come hither with it, Jonathan: place it here. Pointing. No, no, jolter-head, nearer the wall with it. Going behind it, and coming out again. It will do better a little more to this side, for then it will be farther from the window.

 
Ag. O! it will do very well, sir, you take too much trouble.
Roy. Trouble, my dear ma'am! if it were a hundred times more trouble, I should be happy to serve you. I dont mind trouble, if I can get    the thing done cleverly and completely. That's my way of doing things. No, it dont stand to please me yet, it is too near the door now, and the ladies may catch cold, perhaps.
Ag. Very uneasy. Indeed, it stands very well! Harwood will be here before we are ready.
Roy. to Jon. Blockhead, that thou art! can'st thou not set it up even? Now that will do. Getting behind it. This will do. Coming out again. Yes, this will do to a nicety.
Mar. Aside. Heaven be praised this grand matter is settled at last!
Roy. Now, he'll think it odd, perhaps, that I have a screen in my room; but I have a trick for that, ladies; I'll tell him I mean to purchase lands in Canada, and have been looking over the map of America. Agnes looks to Withrington very uneasy.
With. Dont do that, Royston, for then he will examine the screen.
Roy. Or, I may say, there is a chink in the wall, and I placed it to keep out the air.
Ag. No, no, that wont do. For heaven's sake, sir!
Roy. Then I shall just say, I love to have a screen in my room, for I am used to it at home.

 
Mar.    Bless me, Mr. Royston! can't you just leave it alone, and he'll take no notice of it.
Roy. O! if he takes no notice of it, that is a different thing, Miss Withrington; but dont be uneasy, I'll manage it all: I'll conduct the whole business.
Ag. Aside to Withrington. O! my good sir! this fool will ruin every thing.
With. Be quiet, Agnes, we are in for it now.
Roy. Let me remember my lesson too. Here is the letter for him, with the seal as naturally broken, as if the lady had done it herself. Harwood will wonder, now, how I came to know about all this. 'Faith! I believe, he thinks me a strange diving, penetrating, kind of a genius, already, and he is not far wrong, perhaps. You know me, cousin Withrington: ha, ha, ha, ha! You know me.
Ag. O! I wish it were over, and we were out of this house again!
Roy. Dont be uneasy, ma'am, I'll manage every thing. Jonathan, Enter Jonathan, dont you go and tell Mr. Harwood that I have got company here.
Jon. No, no, your honour, I knows better than    that; for the ladies are to be behind the screen, sir, and he must know nothing of the matter, to be sure. I'ficken! it will be rare sport!
Ag. Starting. I hear a knock at the door.
Roy. It is him, I dare say, run Jonathan.
                                         Exit, Jonathan .
 
Ag. Come, come, let us hide ourselves. All get behind the screen but Royston.
Roy. Ay, ay, it will do very well. Looking at the screen.
Ag. Behind. Mariane, dont breathe so loud.
Mar. Behind. I dont breathe loud.
Ag. Behind. Do uncle draw in the edge of your coat.
With. Behind. Poo, silly girl! they can't see a bit of it.
Enter Colonel Hardy and Harwood . Roy. Ha! your servant, my dear Colonel. How goes it, Harwood? I bid my man tell you I was alone, and very much disposed for your good company; but I am doubly fortunate. Bowing to the Colonel.
Col. Indeed, Royston, I have been pretty much with him these two days past, and I dont believe he gives me great thanks for my company. I am like an old horse running after a colt, the young devil never fails to turn now and then, and give him a kick for his pains.
Har. Nay, my good friend, I must be an ass's colt, then. I am sure, I mean it not, but I am    not happy, and I fear I have been peevish with you.
Roy. Attempting to look arch. Peevish, and all that, perhaps, the young man is in love, Colonel.

 
Col. No more, if you please, Royston: we are to speak of this no more.
Enter Jonathan . Jon. Did your honour call?
Roy. No, sirrah. Jonathan goes, as if he were looking for something, and takes a sly peep behind the screen, to see if they are all there. What are you peeping there for? get along, you hound! Does he want to make people believe I keep rary shews behind the wainscot? Exit, Jonathan. But as I was a saying, Colonel, perhaps the young man is in love. He, he, he!
Col. No, no, let us have no more of it.
Roy. But 'faith, I know that he is so! and I know the lady too. She is a cousin of my own, and I am as well acquainted with her, as I am with my own dog.—But you dont ask me what kind of a girl she is. To the Colonel.
Col. Give over now, Royston: she is a very good girl, I dare say.
Roy. Well, you may think so, but— Making significant faces But—I should not say all I know of my own cousin, to be sure, but—
Har.    What are all those cursed grimaces for? Her faults are plain and open as her perfections: these she disdains to conceal, and the others it is impossible.
Roy. Softly, Harwood, dont be in a passion, unless you would imitate your mistress; for she has not the gentlest temper in the world.

 
Har. Well, well, I love her the better for it. I can't bear your insipid passionless women: I would as soon live upon sweet curd all my life, as attach myself to one of them.
Roy. She is very extravagant.
Har. Heaven bless the good folks! would they have a man to give up the woman of his heart, because she likes a bit of lace upon her petticoat.
Roy. Well, but she is—
Col. Devil take you, Royston! can't you hold your tongue about her? you see he can't bear it.
Roy. Making signs to the Colonel. Let me alone; I know when to speak, and when to hold my tongue, as well as another. Indeed, Harwood, I am your friend; and though the lady is my relation, I must say, I wish you had made a better choice. I have discovered something in regard to her this morning, which shews her to    be a very improper one. I cannot say, however, that I have discovered any thing which surprised me, I know her too well.
Har. Vehemently. You are imposed upon by some damn'd falsehood.
Roy. But I have proof of what I say; the lady who is injured by her, gave me this letter to shew to Mr. Withrington. Taking out the letter.
Har. It is some fiend who wants to undermine her, and has forged that scrawl to serve her spiteful purpose.
Roys. I would be glad it were so, my dear
 
friend; but Lady Fade is a woman, whose veracity has never been suspected.
Har. Is it from Lady Fade? Give it me. Snatching the letter.
Roy. It is Agnes's hand, is it not?
Har. It is, at least, a good imitation of it.
Roy. Read the contents, pray!
Har. Madam, what I have said to the prejudice of your ladyship's character to your relation, Mr. Worthy, I am heartily sorry for; and I am ready to beg pardon on my knees if you desire it; to acknowledge before Mr. Worthy himself, that it is a falsehood, or make any other reparation, in a    private way, that you may desire. Let me, then, conjure your ladyship not to expose me, and I shall ever remain your most penitent and grateful A. Withrington.
Roy. The lady would not be so easily pacified, though; for she blackened her character, in order to make her best friend upon earth quarrel with her; so she gave me the letter to shew to her uncle. Is it forged, think you?
Har. It is possible!—I will venture to say— Nay, I am sure it is.
Roy. If it is, there is one circumstance which may help to discover the author, it is directed by a different hand on the back. Look at it.
Har. In great perturbation. Is it? Turns hastily the folds of the letter, but his hand trembles so much, he can't find the back.
Col. My dear Harwood! this is the back of
 
the letter; and methinks the writing is somewhat like your own. Harwood looks at it; then staggering back, throws himself into a chair, which happens to be behind him, and covers his upper face with his hand.
Col. My dear Harwood!
Roy. See how his lips quiver, and his bosom heaves! Let us unbutton him: I fear he is going into a fit. Agnes comes from behind the screen in a fright, and Withrington pulls her in again.
Col. With great tenderness. My dear Harwood!
Har. With a broken voice. I'll go to mine own chamber. Gets up hastily from his chair, and then falls back again in a faint.
Col.    He's gone off.
Roys. Help, help, here! Running about. Who has got hartshorn, or lavender, or water! help here. They all come from behind the screen. Agnes runs to Harwood, and sprinkles him over with lavender, rubbing his temples, &c. whilst Colonel Hardy stares at them all in amazement.
Ag. Alas! we have carried this too far? Harwood! my dear Harwood!
Col. to Roys. What is all this?
Roys. I thought we should amaze you. I knew I should manage it.
Col. You have managed finely indeed, to put Harwood into such a state, with your mummery.
Ag. Will he not come to himself again! get some water, Mariane—See how pale he is. He
 
recovers. O! he recovers! Harwood! do you know me, Harwood?
Har. Looking upon Agnes, and shrinking back from her. Ha! what has brought you here? leave me! leave me! I am wretched enough already.
Ag. I come to bring you relief, my dear Harwood.
Har. No, madam, it is misery you bring. We must part for ever.
Ag. O! uncle! do you hear that? He says we must part for ever.
With. Taking hold of Agnes. Dont be in such a hurry about it.
Har. Rising up. How came you here? to Withrington,    and these ladies?
Roys. O! it was all my contrivance.
With. Pray now, Royston, be quiet a little— Mr. Harwood, I will speak to you seriously. I see you are attached to my niece, and I confess she has many faults; but you are a man of sense, and with you she will make a more respectable figure in the world than with any other. I am anxious for her welfare, and if you will marry her I will give her such a fortune as will make it no longer an imprudent step to follow your inclinations.
Har. No, sir, you shall keep your fortune and your too bewitching niece together. For her sake I would have renounced all ambition, I would have shared with her poverty and neglect, I would have borne with all her faults and weaknesses of
 
nature, I would have toiled, I would have bled for her, but I can never yoke myself with unworthiness.
Ag. Wiping her eyes, and giving two skips upon the floor. O! admirable! admirable! speak to him, uncle! tell him all, my dear uncle! for I can't say a word.
Col. Aside to Royston. Isn't she a little wrong in the head, Royston?
With. Give me your hand, Harwood: you are a noble fellow, and you shall marry this little girl    of mine after all. This story of the letter and Lady Fade, was only a concerted one amongst us, to prove what mettle you are made of. Agnes, to try your love, affected to be shrewish and extravagant; and afterwards, at my suggestion, to try your principles, contrived this little plot, which has just now been unravelled: but I do assure you, on the word of an honest man, there is not a better girl in the kingdom. I must own, however, she is a fanciful little toad. Harwood runs to Agnes, catches her in his arms, and runs two or three times round with her, then takes her hand and kisses it, and then puts his knee to the ground.
Har. My charming, my delightful Agnes! Oh! what a fool have I been! how could I suppose it.
Ag. We took some pains upon you, and it would have been hard if we could not have deceived you amongst us all.
Har. And so thou art a good girl, a very good girl. I know thou art. I'll be hang'd if thou hast one fault in the world.

 
With. No, no, Harwood, not quite so perfect. I can prove her still to be an arrant cheat; for she pretended to be careless of you when she thought of you all the day long, and she pretended to be poor with an hundred thousand pounds, independant of any one, in her possession. She is Miss Withrington the heiress, and this lady, pointing to Mariane,    has only been her representative, for a time, for reasons which I shall explain to you by-and-by. Harwood lets go Agnes's hand, and steps back some paces with a certain gravity and distance in his air.
With. What is the matter now, Hrwood, does this cast a damp upon you?
Roys. It is a weighty distress, truly. Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Col. By heaven! this is good.
Ag. Going up to Harwood, and holding out her hand. Do not look so distantly upon me, Harwood. You was willing to marry me as a poor woman; if there is any thing in my fortune which offends you, I scatter it to the winds.
Har. My admirable girl, it is astonishment, it is something I cannot express, which overcomes, I had almost said distresses me at present. Presenting her to the Colonel. Colonel Hardy, this is the woman I have raved about, this is the woman I have boasted of, this is my Agnes. And this, Miss Withrington, is Colonel Hardy, my own, and my father's friend.
Ag. Holding out her hand to the Colonel. He shall be mine too. Every friend of your's shall be
 
my friend, Harwood; but the friend of your father my most respected one.
Har. Do you hear that, Colonel?
Col. I hear it, my heart hears it, and I bless    you both.
Har. to With. My dear sir, what shall I say to you for all this goodness?
Ag. Tell him he is the dearest good uncle on earth, and we will love him all our lives for it. Yes, indeed, we will, uncle, clapping his shoulder, very, very dearly.
Roys. Now, good folks, have not I managed it cleverly?
Mar. Pray let me come from the back ground a little: and since I must quit all the splendour of heiresship, I desire, at least, that I may have some respect paid me for having filled the situation so well, as the old Mayor receives the thanks of the corporation, when the new Mayor—Bless me! here comes Opal! I have not just done with it yet.
With. Your servant, Mr. Opal.
Mar. to Op. Are not you surprised to find us all here?
Op. Harwood I know is a very lucky fellow, but I knew you were here. It is impossible, you see, to escape me. But half aside to Mariane I wanted to tell you Colonel Beaumont is come to Bath. Now I should like to be introduced to him on his arrival. He will be very much the fashion    I dare say, and I should like to have a friendship for
 
him. You understand me? You can procure this for me, I know.
With. Come, Mr. Opal, you must join in our good humour here, for we have just been making up a match. My niece, Agnes, with a large fortune bestows herself on a worthy man, who would have married her without one; and, Mariane, who for certain reasons has assumed her character of heiress since we came to Bath, leaves all her borrowed state, in hopes that the man who would have married with a fortune, will not now forsake her.
Op. Stammering. Wh—Wh—What is all this?
Roy. Half aside to Opal. You seem disturbed, Mr. Opal, you have not been paying your addresses to her, I hope.
Op. Aside to Royston. No, not paying my addresses; that is to say, not absolutely. I have paid her some attention to be sure.
Roy. Nodding significantly. It is well for you it is no worse.
Mar. Turning to Opal, who looks very much frightened. What is it you say? Dont you think I overheard it? Not paid your addresses to me! O! you false man! can you deny the declarations you    have made? the oaths you have sworn? O! you false man!
Op. Upon honour, madam, we men of fashion dont expect to be called to an account for every foolish thing we say.
Mar. What you have written then shall witness
 
against you. Will you deny this promise of marriage in your own hand-writing? Taking out a paper.
Roy. Aside to Opal. What, a promise of marriage, Mr. Opal? The devil himself could not have put it into your head to do a worse thing than this.
Op. Very frightened, but making a great exertion. Dont think, ma'am, to bully me into the match. I can prove that promise to be given to you under the false character of an heiress, therefore your deceit loosens the obligation.
With. Take care what you say, sir, to Opal, I will not see my niece wronged. The law shall do her justice, whatever expence it may cost me.
Mar. Being an heiress or not has nothing to do in the matter, Mr. Opal; for you expressly say in this promise, that my beauty and perfections alone have induced you to engage yourself, and I will take all the men in court to witness, whether I am not as handsome to-day as I was yesterday.
Op.    I protest there is not such a word in the paper.
Mar. Holding out the paper. O base man! will you deny your own writing? Opal snatches the paper from her, tears it to pieces.
Mar. Gathering up the scattered pieces. O! I can put them together again. Opal, snatching up one of the pieces, crams it into his mouth and chews it.
Roy. Chew fast, Opal, she will snatch it out
 
of your mouth else. There is another bit for you. Offering him another piece.
Mar. Bursting into a loud laugh, in which all the company join. Is it very nice, Mr. Opal? You munch it up as expeditiously as a bit of plumb-cake.
Op. What the deuce does all this mean?
With. This naughty girl, Mr. Opal, has only been amusing herself with your promise, which she never meant to make any other use of; she is already engaged to a very worthy young man, who will receive with her a fortune by no means contemptible.
Op. Well, well, much good may it do him: what do I care about— mumbling to himself.
Roy. Clapping Opal's shoulder. Ha, ha, ha! dont look so foolish man; you did not know a word of all this, now. Ha, ha, ha! how some people do get themselves into scrapes! They have    no more notion of managing their affairs than if they were so many sheep. Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Enter Humphry . Humph. to Roy. I would speak a word with your honour. Whispers to Royston.
Roy. In a rage. What! given away the place! It is impossible! It is some wicked machination! it is some damn'd trick!
With. Be moderate, Royston: what has good Mr. Humphry been telling you?
Roy. O! the devil of a bite! his grace has
 
given away the place to a poor simpleton, who had never a soul to speak for him.
With. Who told you this, Mr. Humphry?
Humph. Truly, sir, I called upon his Grace's gentleman, just to make up a kind of acquaintance with him, as his honour desired me, and he told me it was given away this morning.
Roy. What cursed luck!
Humph. Why, says I, I thought my master was to have had it, Mr. Smoothly; and so he would, says he, but one person came to the Duke after another, teazing him about Mr. Royston, till he grew quite impatient; for there was but one of all those friends, says he, winking with his eye so, who did speak at last to the purpose, but then    upon Mr. Sucksop's taking up your master's interest, he shrunk back from his word, which offended his grace very much.
Roy. Blundering blockhead!
Humph. But after all, says he, it might have come round again, if the gout had not stung him so wickedly, when in came the doctor, who has promised to cure him these three weeks, and only made it so much the worse, and upon his likewise presuming to teaze him about Mr. Royston, he fell into a violent passion, and gave away the place directly to poor Mr. Drudgewell, who had no recommendation at all, but fifteen years hard service in the office.
Roy. Well, now! well, now! you see how the world goes: simpletons and ideots carry every thing before them.

 
With. Nay, Royston, blame yourself too. Did not I tell you, you had found out too many roads to one place, and would lose your way amongst them?
Roy. No, no, it is all that cursed perverse fate of mine! By the Lord, half the trouble I have taken for this paltry office, would have procured some people an archbishoprick. There is Harwood,    now, fortune presses herself upon him, and makes him, at one stroke, an idle gentleman for life.
Har. No, sir, an idle gentleman I will never be: my Agnes shall never be the wife of any thing so contemptible.
Ag. I thank you, Harwood; I do, indeed, look for an honourable distinction in being your wife; you shall still exert your powers in the profession you have chosen: you shall be the weak ones stay, the poor man's advocate; you shall gain fair fame in recompense, and that will be our nobility.
With. Well said, my children! you have more sense than I thought you had amongst all these whimsies. Now, let us take our leave of plots and story-telling, if you please, and all go to my house to supper. Royston shall drown his disappointment in a can of warm negus, and Mr. Opal shall have something more palatable than his last spare morsel.
                                         Exeunt. Back matter

THE END OF THE TRYAL.
NOTES

AG
AG. EST. AND MAR
BET
COL
E
EST
HAR
HARWOOD
HUMPH
JON
MAR
MISS ESTON
OP
R
ROY
ROYS
SER
SIR LOFT
THOM
WITH

____________________________________________________________



Full text: WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY IN PROSE. IN FIVE ACTS.
 
Front matter  PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Robert Kennedy of Dungarren commonly called Dungarren .
Murrey.
Rutherford , Minister of the Parish.
Fatheringham , Friend of Murrey.
The Sheriff of Renfrewshire.
The Baillie or Magistrate of Paisley.
Black Bawldy , the Herdboy of Dungarren.
Anderson , the principal Domestic of Dungarren.
Wilkin , an Idiot.
Crowd, Jailor, Landlord, &c.
WOMEN. Lady Dungarren commonly so called, Mother of Robert Kennedy.
Violet , Daughter of Murrey.
Annabella , the rich Relation of Lady Dungarren.
Grizeld Bane , reputed Witch.
Mary Macmurren , reputed Witch.
Elspy Low , reputed Witch.
Phemy , Maid to Annabella.
Nurse, Maidservants, Crowd, &c.
Scene in Renfrewshire, in Scotland.
 
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. —A Parlour in the House or Tower of Dungarren. Enter Lady Dungarren and Annabella , by different sides. ANNABELLA. You must be surprised, my dear cousin, at my unexpected return.
LADY DUNGARREN. I will frankly confess that I am. How did you find your friends in Glenrowan?
ANNABELLA. With their house full of disagreeable visiters and discomfort: another day of it would have cast me into a fever; so I will trespass on your hospitality a week longer, knowing how kindly disposed you have always been to the child of your early friend.

 
LADY DUNGARREN. It would be strange, indeed, if the daughter of Duncan Gordon were not welcome here.
ANNABELLA. How has poor Jessie been since I left you?
LADY DUNGARREN shaking her head. I have but a sorrowful account to give of her.
ANNABELLA. Had she any rest last night? Does she look as wildly as she did? Were any strange noises heard in the chamber during the night?
LADY DUNGARREN. Ay; noises that made me start and tremble, and feel a horrid consciousness that some being or other was in the room near me, though to the natural eye invisible.
ANNABELLA. What kind of sounds were they? Why did you think they were so near you?
LADY DUNGARREN. I was sitting by the table, with my head resting    on my hand, when the door leading from the back staircase, which I am certain I had bolted in the evening, burst open.
ANNABELLA. And what followed?

 
LADY DUNGARREN. I verily thought to see some elrich form or other make its appearance, and I sat for some moments rivetted to my chair, without power to move hand or foot, or almost to breathe.
ANNABELLA. Yet you saw nothing?
LADY DUNGARREN. Nothing.
ANNABELLA. And heard only the bursting of the door?
LADY DUNGARREN. Only that for a time: but afterwards, when I listened intently, I heard strange whisperings near me, and soft steps, as of unshod feet, passing between me and the bed.
ANNABELLA. Footsteps?
LADY DUNGARREN. Ay; and the curtains of the bed began to shake as if touched by a hand, or the motion of some passing body. Then I knew that they were dealing with my poor child, and I had no power to break the spell of their witchcraft, for I had no voice to speak.
ANNABELLA. You had no power to speak?

 
LADY DUNGARREN. No; though the Lord's prayer was on my lips, I was unable to utter it.
ANNABELLA.    Heaven preserve us! what a dreadful situation you were in! Did the poor child seem to notice any thing?
LADY DUNGARREN. I cannot say how she looked when the door burst open; but as soon as I could observe her, her eyes were wide open, gazing fixedly, as if some ugly visage were hanging over her, from which she could not turn away, and presently she fell into a convulsion, and I at that instant recovered my voice and my strength, and called nurse from her closet to assist her.
ANNABELLA. What did nurse think?
LADY DUNGARREN. Nurse said she was sure that both Grizeld Bane and Mary Macmurren had been in the room. And this I will take my oath to, that afterwards, when she fell quiet, she muttered in her sleep, in a thick untuneable voice, and amongst the words which she uttered, I distinctly heard the name of Mary Macmurren.

 
ANNABELLA. What an awful thing it is if people can have power from the evil spirit to inflict such calamity!
LADY DUNGARREN. Awful indeed!
ANNABELLA. How can they purchase such power?
LADY DUNGARREN. The ruin of a Christian soul is price enough    for any thing. Satan, in return for this, will bestow power enough to do whatever his bondswoman or bondsman listeth.
ANNABELLA. Yet they are always miserable and poor.
LADY DUNGARREN. Not always; but malignant gratifications are what they delight in, and nothing else is of much value to them.
ANNABELLA. It may be so:—it is strange and fearful!
LADY DUNGARREN. I must go to my closet now, and mix the medicine for poor Jessie, to be ready at the proper time; for I expect the minister to pray by her to-night, and would have every thing prepared before he comes.
                                         Exit.
 
ANNABELLA alone, after a thoughtful pause. Ay, if there be in reality such supernatural agency, by which a breast fraught with passion and misery may find relief. Starting back. Dreadful resource! I may not be so assisted. After walking to and fro in great perturbation. Oh, Dungarren, Dungarren! that a paltry girl, who is not worthy to be my tirewoman, the orphan of a murderer—a man disgraced, who died in a pit and was buried in a moor; one whose very forehead is covered with blushing shame when the eye of an irreproachable gentlewoman looks upon her; whose very voice doth    alter and hesitate when a simple question of her state or her family is put to her,—that a creature thus naturally formed to excite aversion and contempt should so engross thy affections! It makes me mad!—“May not be so assisted!” Evil is but evil, and torment is but torment!—I have felt both—I have felt them to extremity? what have I then to fear? Starts on hearing the door open behind her, as Phemy enters. Who is there?
PHEMY. Only me, madam.
ANNABELLA. What brings thee here?

 
PHEMY. I came to know if you will trust the Glasgow carrier, who is just come for the orders of the family, with your commission to the silk shop.
ANNABELLA. What art thou telling me?
PHEMY. Of your commission to the silk shop.
ANNABELLA. I don't understand thee.
PHEMY. The additional yards of silk that are wanted.
ANNABELLA. I want none, fool! Thy wits are bewildered.
PHEMY. Not my wits, Madam. What will you please to have, then, for the trimming of your new mantua?
ANNABELLA. Newt skins and adder skins, an thou wilt.
PHEMY. That might do for a witch's gown, indeed: Grizeld Bane might have a garniture of that sort.
ANNABELLA.    What dost thou know of Grizeld Bane?

 
PHEMY. Stories enow, if they be true. It is she, or Mary Macmurren, who has, as they say, bewitched the poor young lady here; and it was a spell cast by her, that made the farmer's pretty daughter fall over the crag and break her leg, the week before her wedding.
ANNABELLA. Before her wedding?
PHEMY. Yes, truly, Madam; and no wedding at all will ever follow such an untoward mischance.
ANNABELLA. Who told thee this?
PHEMY. Everybody tells it, and knows it to be true.— After a pause. But the carrier is waiting.— She does not heed me. Aside. What is the matter, Madam? Are you not well?
ANNABELLA rousing herself suddenly. Dost thou know Grizeld Bane?
PHEMY. Heaven forfend!
ANNABELLA. Dost thou know where she lives?

 
PHEMY. Somewhere not far distant, I believe: Black Bawldy the herd knows her den well enough.
ANNABELLA. Is he in the house at present?
PHEMY. Very likely; for this is the time when his cows are brought in for the milking.
ANNABELLA. Go find him, if thou canst, and send him to me immediately. Exit Phemy . If there be    a spell to break wedlock, and to break affection also, it were well worth its purchase at any price; yea, though the soul's jeopardy were added to the gold.
Re-enter Phemy , followed by Bawldy . PHEMY. I had not far to seek for him: he stood waiting in the passage, for the cooling of his brose.
ANNABELLA. Come nearer, Bawldy. Dost thou know where Grizeld Bane lives?
BAWLDY. Ay, that I do, to my cost. She and her black cat, too, live owre near my milk kye. Brindle
 
and Hawky gi' but half the milk they should gi', and we wat weel whare the ither half gangs to.
ANNABELLA. Never mind that, my good lad! Hie to her immediately, and tell her to come to me.
BAWLDY. To you, Leddy?
ANNABELLA. Yes: to come to me without loss of time.— There is money for thee. Giving money. Do thy errand speedily and secretly: let nobody know that I have sent thee.
BAWLDY. An' she 's to come to you here, hidlings, as it war?
ANNABELLA. Yes, Bawldy; and when she comes, let her wait for me in the cattle shed, by the wood, and I 'll meet her there. Dost thou understand me, man? Go quickly.
BAWLDY.    The night, Leddy?
ANNABELLA. Yes, to-night. Why dost thou look so scared?
BAWLDY. I darna gang to her at night.—Gude be wi' us! an I war to find her at her cantrips, I had
 
better be belaired in a bog, or play coupcarling owre the craig o' Dalwhirry.
ANNABELLA. She must be very terrible to make thee so afraid.
BAWLDY. When she begins to mutter wi' her white wuthered lips, and her twa gleg eyen are glowering like glints o' wildfire frae the hollow o' her dark bent brows, she 's enough to mak a trooper quake; ay, wi' baith swurd and pistol by his side.—No, no, Leddy! the sun maun be up in the lift whan I venture to her den.
ANNABELLA. Thou wilt get there before it be dark, if thou make good speed.
BAWLDY. No, though I had the speed o' a mawkin. It is gloaming already; black clouds are spreading fast owre the sky, and far-off thunner is growling. There is a storm coming on, and the fiends o' the air are at wark; I darna gang till the morning.
ANNABELLA. Timid loon! retire then, and go in the morning. But see that thou keep the secret. I'll    give thee more money, if thou prove trusty and diligent.
                                         Exit Bawldy .
 
PHEMY. The carrier will set off in a trice, Madam.
ANNABELLA. Let him go.
PHEMY. And no orders given?
ANNABELLA. Give him what orders thou wilt, and plague me no more.
                                         Exeunt severally. SCENE II. Before the Gate of Dungarren Tower: Anderson and other Servants are seen loitering within the Gate. Enter Dungarren , with a fowling-piece in his hand, and a pouch or bag swung from his shoulder, as returned from sport. ANDERSON advancing to meet him. I'm right glad to see your honour returned; for the night draws on, and it wad hae been nae joke, I trow, to hae been belated on a haunted warlock moor, and thunner growling i' the welkin.
DUNGARREN. The sky indeed looks threatening.

 
ANDERSON. And what sport has your honour had the day? The birds grow wilder every year, now.
DUNGARREN. Think you so, Anderson?
ANDERSON. Trowth do I! There's something uncanny about them too. It's a fearfu' time we live in.
DUNGARREN. I have done pretty well, however. Give this to the housekeeper to increase the stores of her larder. Unfastening the bag, and giving it to Anderson .
ANDERSON. By my faith! she'll be glad enough o' sick a supply; for Madam Annabell is come back again, wi' that Episcopal lassie frae the Isle o' Barra, that reads out o' a prayer book, and ca's hersell her Leddy's gentlewoman. Lord be mercifu' to us! the leddy 's bad enough, but Job himsell could hardly thole the gentlewoman.
DUNGARREN. What has brought her back so soon? She was to have staid a week in Dumbartonshire.
ANDERSON. That's more than I can say: but here comes    Black Bawldy, wha was sent for to speak to her;
 
ay, and gaed into the very parlour till her. He, maybe, kens what has brought her back.
DUNGARREN. That's strange enough.
ANDERSON. Nae mair strange than true. Into the very parlour: I saw him set his dirty feet on the clean floor wi' my ain eyen.
Enter Bawldy . DUNGARREN. So, Bawldy, thou 'rt become company for ladies in a parlour.
BAWLDY. Toot, your honour! ony body 's gude enough to haver wi' them, when they're wearying.
DUNGARREN. What makes Mrs. Annabell return to us so soon, if she be wearying?
BAWLDY. She'll no weary now, when your honour's come hame.
DUNGARREN. Has any thing happen'd? She was to have staid a week in Dumbartonshire.
BAWLDY. Maybe she has been a week there, o' her ain
 
reckoning, tho' we ca' it only twa days. Folks said when she gaed awa', that she wou'd na be lang awa'. It wou'd be as easy to keep a moth frae the can'le, or a cat frae the milk-house, as keep her awa' frae the tower o' Dungarren lowering his voice when the laird is at hame.
DUNGARREN. What say'st thou, varlet?
BAWLDY.    Only what I hear folks say, your honour.
DUNGARREN. Go thy ways to thy loft and thy byre. Folks are saucy, and teach lads to forget themselves. Exit Bawldy . Pointing to the bag. Take it in, Anderson.
                                         Exit Anderson . DUNGARREN alone, turning impatiently from the gate. I thought to have crossed the threshold of my own house in peace.—To be pestered with the passion of an indelicate vixen!—She fastens her affection upon me like a doctor's blister-sheet, strewed with all the stinging powders of the torrid zone, for daring and desperate medication. After pacing to and fro in a disturbed manner. And my gentle Violet, too: must she be still subjected to her scornful looks and insulting insinuations? A noble spirit like hers, under
 
such painful circumstances to be exposed to such insolence! It shall not be: I will not suffer it. A thoughtful pause. To affront a lady in my own house? Not to be thought of! To leave the country at once, and let the sea and its waves roll between us? Ay, this were well, were not all that is dear to me left behind;—my mother, my poor afflicted sister, my dear, dear Violet, the noble distressed Violet Murrey.— No; I will stay and contend with the termagant,    as I would with an evil spirit. Had she the soul of a woman within her, though the plainest and meanest of her sex, I would pity and respect her; but as she is—O! shame upon it! she makes me as bad as herself. I know not what to do: I dare not enter yet.
                                         Exit the way by which he came.
 
SCENE III. A wild Moor, skirted on one side by a thick tangled Wood, through which several open paths are seen. The Stage darkened to represent faint moonlight through heavy gathering clouds. Thunder and lightning. Enter by the front Elspy Low, Mary Macmurren , and her son, Wilkin , who stop and listen to the thunder. MARY MACMURREN spreading her arms exultingly. Ay, ay! this sounds like the true sound o' Princedome and Powerfu'ness.
ELSPY LOW clapping her hands as another louder peal rolls on. Ay; it sounds royally! we shall na mare be deceived; it wull prove a' true at last.
MARY MACMURREN. This very night we shall ken what we shall ken. We shall be wi' the Beings of power—be wi' them and be of them.
                                         Thunder again.
 
ELSPY LOW. It is an awfu' din, and tells wi' a lordly voice wha is coming and at hand: we shall na mare be deceived.
MARY MACMURREN to Wilkin , as he presses closer to her side. Dinna tug at me sa wickedly, Wilkin; thou shalt ha' a bellyfu' soon o' the fat o' the lawn, my poor glutton.
WILKIN. Fou! fou! meat! great meat!—hurr, hurr! making a noise in his throat to express pleasure it's a-coming!
MARY MACMURREN. We shall ha' what we list at last,—milk and meat! meat and malt!
ELSPY LOW. Mingling and merry-making; and revenge for the best sport of a'!
MARY MACMURREN. Ay; the hated anes will pay the cost, I trow. We'll sit at our good coags of cream, and think o' the growling carle's kye wi' their udders lank and sapless, and the goodwife greeting ow'r her    kirn.
ELSPY LOW. Ha, ha, ha! there's good spice in that, woman, to relish far poorer fare.

 
MARY MACMURREN. They refused us a han'fu' in our greatest need, but now it wull be our turn to ha' fou sacks and baith cakes and kebbucks at command, while their aumery is bare.
ELSPY LOW. Ha, ha, ha! there's good spice in that, kimmer.
                                         A very loud peal, &c. MARY MACMURREN. Hear ye that! the thunner grows louder and louder; and here she comes wi' her arms in the air and her spirit as hie as the clouds. Her murky chief and his murky mates wull soon fra a' quarters o' the warld, I warrant ye, come trooping to their tryste.
Enter Grizeld Bane from the wood by the bottom of the Stage, advancing with wild frantic gestures. GRIZELD BANE stopping on the middle of the stage, and spreading wide her raised arms with lofty courtesy. Come, come, my mighty master!

Come on the clouds; come on the wind!
Come for to loosen, and come for to bind!
Rise from the raging sea; rise from the mine!
There's power in the night storm for thee and for thine.
 
MARY MACMURREN very eagerly to Grizeld . Dost thou really see him?
ELSPY LOW in the same manner. Dost thou see him? or hear him?
MARY MACMURREN. Is he near us?
ELSPY LOW. Is he on the moor?
GRIZELD BANE. Hold your peace, wretches! he may start up by your side in an instant, and scare the very    life from your body, if ye forget what I told you.
ELSPY LOW. I have na' forgotten it.
MARY MACMURREN. Nor I neither. We're to tak' han's first of a'. Takes Elspy by the hand, and then turns to Wilkin . And thine, too, Wilkin.
WILKIN. Meat, meat!
MARY MACMURREN. No, glutton; thou mun gi' me thy haun and go round, as I told thee.

 
WILKIN. Round! round! pots be round, dishes be round; a' fou for Wilkin! hurr, hurr!
                                          Grizeld Bane , joins them, and they all take hands, moving in a circular direction, and speaking all together in a dull chanting measure.
To the right, to the right, to the right we wheel;
Thou heaving earth, free passage give, and our dark Prince reveal.
To the right, &c. three times, then turning the contrary way.
To the left, to the left, to the left we go;
Ye folding clouds, your curtain rend, and our great Master show.                                          Loud thunder. ELSPY LOW after a pause. Is he coming yet?
MARY MACMURREN. Is he coming, Grizeld Bane? I see nothing.
GRIZELD BANE seizing her by the throat. Hold thy peace, or I'll strangle thee! Is it for a wretch like thee to utter earthly words on the very verge of such an awful presence?
MARY MACMURREN. For God's sake!—for Satan's sake!—for ony sake, let gang thy terrible grip.
                                         A tremendous loud peal.
 
GRIZELD BANE exultingly. There's an astounding din to make your ears tingle! as if the welkin were breaking down    upon us with its lading of terror and destruction! The lightning has done as I bade it. I see him, I see him now.
MARY MACMURREN. Where, where? I see nothing.
ELSPY LOW. Nor I either, Grizeld.
GRIZELD BANE. Look yonder to the skirt of that cloud: his head is bending over it like a knight from the keep of a castle. Hold ye quiet for a space; quiet as the corse in its coffin: he will be on the moor in a trice.
ELSPY LOW. Trowth, I think he will; for I'm trembling sa.
MARY MACMURREN. I'm trem'ling too, woman; and sa is poor Wilkin.
GRIZELD BANE exultingly, after another very loud peal, &c.. Ay, roar away! glare away! roar to the very outrage of roaring! Brave heralding, I trow, for the prince of the power of the air!—He will be here, anon.

 
MARY MACMURREN. I'm sure he will, for my legs bend under me sa, I canna' stand upright.
GRIZELD BANE. Hold thy tongue! he is on the moor. Look yonder, where he is moving with strides like the steps of a man, and light by his side. Dost thou see it? To Mary Macmurren .
MARY MACMURREN. Preserve us from skathe! I see like a man wi' a lantern. Dost thou see it, Elspy?
ELSPY LOWE.    Distinctly: and wi' what fearfu' strides he comes on!
GRIZELD BANE. It is him; he approaches. Bow your heads instantly to the earth, and repeat the Lord's Prayer backwards, if you can.
                                         They all bow their bodies and begin an inarticulate muttering; and presently enters Murrey , bearing a lantern, which he hastily darkens upon discovering them, and tries to avoid them. GRIZELD BANE. Do not pass from us! stay with us; speak to us, Satan! Our spells are shrewd and sure, and
 
thou knowest we have served and will serve thee. Turn not away! Give us power and we'll worship thee. Art thou not come to our tryste?
MURREY. Miserable women! what brings you here at this hour in this place? With whom have you made a tryste?
GRIZELD BANE. With thyself, mighty Satan! for we know thee well enough for all the skreen of darkness that encircles thee.
MURREY in a deep, strong, feigned voice. What is your will with me?
GRIZELD BANE. Give us power, and we'll worship thee.
MURREY. What power do you covet? Power over goods and chattels, or power over bodies and spirits? Say which, by your compact, you would purchase?
GRIZELD BANE eagerly. Both, both!
MURREY. Ye ask too much; take your choice of the one or the other.

 
MARY MACMURREN.    What say'st thou, Elspy?
ELSPY LOW. I'll consider first.
MARY MACMURREN. Goods and chattels for my compact.
GRIZELD BANE to her disdainfully. Sordid caitiff! Bodies and spirits for mine!
MURREY. I will see to that at convenient season.
GRIZELD BANE, MARY MACMURREN, and ELSPY LOW speaking at once. Now, now!
GRIZELD BANE. Let us have it now, mighty master, and we'll swear to the compact on this spot.
MURREY. Have ye considered it? Ye shall have your will on earth for a term, and then ye must serve my will in the pit of fire and brimstone for ever.
GRIZELD BANE. Be it so! and make this very night the beginning of our power.
MURREY. Ye are rare mates, indeed, to be so eagerly set upon evil.

 
GRIZELD BANE. Are we not, master? Swear us forthwith, and remove that dull darkness from thy presence. Call round thy liege imps and begin. Ay, ay; they are all coming.
MARY MACMURREN. Where, where, Grizeld?
GRIZELD BANE. A score of grinning faces to the right and the left. Dost thou not see them, blind mole that thou art? But where is he who was wont to attend thee, great chieftain? Thou hast never a liege man like him.
MURREY.    Whom dost thou mean, haggard dame?
GRIZELD BANE. He with the wreath round his throat; the fellest and bravest of them all.
MURREY. He shall be with me when I meet you again.
GRIZELD BANE. Do not leave us now, princely master! do not deceive us again: bind us and give us power ere we part.
MURREY. Go to the further side of the wood, and I'll follow you: I may not bind you here, for I hear
 
the sound of horses approaching. Begone; mortal man must not disturb our rites.
                                         As the women are about to go off, Rutherford , as if just dismounted, holding his horse by the bridle, appears from behind a rocky hillock which forms one of the side scenes, near the front, whilst the lightning, coming in a broad flash across the Stage, shows every thing upon it distinctly for a moment. A loud peal follows: Rutherford and his horse draw back and disappear; and exeunt by the opposite side Grizeld Bane , &c., leaving Murrey alone. And so there be verily such wretched creatures in the world, who are, or desire to be, in league with the wicked one! It is a fearful and mortifying glimpse of human nature. I hope they have not scared my poor child upon her way; or rather, that this awful storm has prevented her from coming abroad. O, would I had not requested her to meet me! for I know her brave spirit and the strength of her affection; neither storm nor danger will deter her. Why did I tempt her? Alas, my gentle child! is this the love of a parent? Here she is!

 
Enter Violet from the same side by which Rutherford disappeared, and he runs to her and locks her in his arms, both remaining silent for a time. VIOLET. My father! my dear, dear father!
MURREY. My own sweet Violet! all that I can call my    own, and worth all that I have lost. But for thee, my dear child, I should in truth be, what I am now, by all but thyself, believed to be,—no longer a being of this world.
VIOLET. Say not so, my dear father! are there not kindness and humanity every where, whether you receive it under one name or another? And if this be not the case, take me with you, and you shall be no longer friendless and bereft.
MURREY. No, Violet; that I will never do. To see thee by stealth, were it but a few times in the course of years, with sad dreary intervals between, is still worth living for; and more than a man, stained with the blood of a fellow creature, deserves.
VIOLET. Ah, why will you tax yourself so harshly! The quarrel was fastened on you.

 
MURREY. Fool that I was, to let the angry reproaches of a fool get such mastery over me! were reason and prowess bestowed upon me for such a despicable use? Oh! had Fatheringham, who stood by, and was the only witness of the combat, endeavoured, as he might have done, to reconcile us, that blood had never been shed.
VIOLET. But what is past is past; let us think of the lot which is our portion now—of that which lies    before us. I will love you always, and think of you always, and be with you always, if you will permit me. The rank and the fare and the home that are good enough for you are good enough for me. And if Fatheringham be still in life, he may again appear to clear you from this crime. In the mean time, your supposed death and your supposed body being found and buried by your friends, give you in any distant retreat a complete security. Let me then, my dear father, go with you now, or follow you soon.
MURREY. Is there not one to be left behind who is dear to you?
VIOLET. No one who is or ought to be so dear as you. And I shrink from the thought of being received into a family who will despise me.

 
MURREY. Violet, thou art too proud: thou hast got my infirmity by inheritance. Yes, I was proud once: but, dead in men's belief, and separated from the social world, I am now, as it were, a dead man in my own feelings. I look on the things of this earth as though I belonged not to it. I am meek and chastened now, and will not encourage thee in the cherishing of imprudent unreasonable pride. But we will talk of this elsewhere:    I hear voices from the wood.
                                         Wild cries from the women heard at a distance, and then nearer. I fear they will return when they find I do not join them.
VIOLET. Whom do you mean?
MURREY. Didst thou meet nobody on the way?
VIOLET. Nobody but our good minister and his man, going, as I suppose, to the Tower of Dungarren, to pray by the sick child.
MURREY. I hope he did not see you.
VIOLET. I hope he did not: for I tried to conceal myself
 
behind a bush; and he and the servant passed me in silence.
                                         Wild cries without, nearer than before. MURREY. Let us leave this spot: those creatures are returning to it. I will tell thee about them when we are in safety.
                                         Exeunt in haste. SCENE IV. A narrow Passage Hall or Lobby. Enter Phemy , meeting Anderson , who carries a light in his hand. ANDERSON. We may a' gang to our beds now, that are nae appointed to sit up.
PHEMY. What a terrible storm we have had! The brazen sconces in the hall, with the guns, pistols, pikes, and claymores, made such a clattering, as if they were coming down upon our heads altogether, with the slates and rafters of the old roof on the top of all. I'm certain a thunderbolt struck somewhere or other on this unlucky house: I wish I were out of it.

 
ANDERSON. It's pity ye dinna get your wish, then. I'm sure there's naebody rightfully belanging to this family that has ony mind to baulk it.
PHEMY. Don't be so hasty, Mr. Anderson: I had no intention to disparage the house of Dungarren, though there be neither silk nor tapestry on its walls, like the houses that I have lived in.
ANDERSON. Weel, weel! be it sae! Silk and tapestry may be plentier than manners in the rich island of Barra.
PHEMY. I have lived in other places than Barra, I assure you.
ANDERSON. I dinna doubt ye hae; but let us us mak nae mair quarrelling about it now, whan we shou'd    a' be thankfu' that we war sheltered frae sic a storm in ony house.—Grizeld Bane and her mates war on the moor the night, I'll tak my aith on't. God help ony poor wanderer wha may hae been belated near their haunts! I wadna hae been in his skin for the best har'st fee that ever was paid into a Lowlander's purse or a Highlander's spleuchan.

 
PHEMY. Was not the minister expected?
ANDERSON. O! he , belike, might cross the moor unscathed. It wad be a bauld witch or warlock either, that wad meddle wi' the minister. And that is the reason, I reckon, why he winna believe there is ony sic thing in a' the country about.
Enter Bawldy . PHEMY. Here comes Bawldy. What keeps thee up, man?
BAWLDY. I'm waiting for the minister.
ANDERSON. Wha bade thee wait? What is Duncan about?
BAWLDY. He's about a Highlandman's business, just doing naething at a'; and wad be snoring on the settle in the turning o' a bannock, if fear wad let him sleep.
PHEMY. Is he more afraid than the rest of you?
BAWLDY. He has mair cause, mistress: he has seen
 
bogles enow in his time, and kens a' the gaits    and fashions o' them.
PHEMY. Has he indeed.
BAWLDY. Ay, certes; by his ain tale, at least. We hae heard o' mawkins starting up in the shapes of auld women, whan chased to a cross running burn, but Duncan has seen it. Nae wonner if he be feared!
ANDERSON. Weel, than, an thou will sit up, he'll tell thee stories to keep thee frae wearying; and I dinna care if I join ye mysell for an hour or sae, for I'm naewise disposed for my ain bed in that dark turret-chaumer.
BAWLDY. But gin ye keep company wi' stable loons and herds, Mr. Anderson, ye'll gi' them, nae doubt, a wee smack o' your ain higher calling. Is the key o' the cellar in your pouch? My tongue's unco dry after a' this fright.
ANDERSON. Awa', ye pawky thief! Dost tu think that I'll herrie the laird's cellar for thee or ony body?—But there's the whisky bottle in my ain cupboard, wi' some driblets in it yet, that ye may tak; and deil a drap mair shall ye get, an
 
thy tongue were as guizened as a spelding. I wonder wha learnt sic a youngster as thee to be sae pawky.
PHEMY.    Bawldy has by nature cunning enough to lose nothing for want of asking; and Mr. Anderson, too, has his own natural faculty for keeping what he has got.—Good night to you both.
ANDERSON. Good night to ye. Half aside. I'm sure I wad rather bid you good night than good morrow, at ony time.
                                         Exeunt severally. SCENE V. A large Chamber, with a Bed at the bottom of the Stage, on which is discovered a sick Child, and Lady Dungarren seated by it. Enter Dungarren by the front, stepping very softly. DUNGARREN. Is she asleep?
LADY DUNGARREN. Yes; she has been asleep for some minutes.

 
DUNGARREN. Let me watch by her then, and go you to rest.
LADY DUNGARREN. I dare not: her fits may return.
DUNGARREN. The medicine you have given her will, I trust, prevent it: so do go to rest, my dear mother!
LADY DUNGARREN. No, dear Robert; her disease is one over which no natural medicine has any power. As sure as there are witches and warlocks on earth —and we know there are—they have been dealing with her this night.
DUNGARREN. Be not too sure of this. The noise of the storm, and the flashes of lightning, might alarm her, and bring on convulsions.
LADY DUNGARREN. Ah, foolish youth! thou art proud of the heathenish learning thou hast gleaned up at college, and wilt not believe what is written in Scripture.
DUNGARREN. Nay, mother, say only that I do not believe—
 
Enter Annabella behind them, and stops to listen. —such explanations of Scripture as have given countenance to superstitious alarm. Our good pastor himself attaches a different meaning to those passages you allude to, and has but little faith in either witches or apparitions.
LADY DUNGARREN.    Yes, he has been at college, good man as he is. Who else would doubt of it?
DUNGARREN. But Violet Murrey has not been at college, and she has as little faith in them as Mr. Rutherford.
ANNABELLA advancing passionately. If Violet Murrey's faith, or pretended faith, be the rule we are to go by, the devil and his bondsfolk will have a fine time of it in this unhappy county of Renfrew. She will take especial care to speak no words for the detection of mischief which she profits by.
DUNGARREN. Profits by! What means that foul insinuation?
LADY DUNGARREN. Be not so violent, either of you. Soften that
 
angry eye, Robert; and remember you are speaking to a lady.
DUNGARREN. And let her remember that she is speaking of a lady.
ANNABELLA. What rank the daughter of a condemned malefactor holds in the country, better heralds than I must determine.
DUNGARREN. Malignant and heartless reproach! Provoke me not beyond measure, Annabella. For this good woman's sake, for thy own sake, for the sake of female dignity and decorum, provoke me no more with words so harsh, so unjust, so unseemly.
ANNABELLA. Not so unseemly, Dungarren, as degrading    the heir of an honourable house, with an attachment so—But I will say no more.
DUNGARREN. You have said too much already.
LADY DUNGARREN. Hush, hush! for Heaven's sake be peaceable! You have wakened the child from her sleep. Look how she gazes about. Nurse! nurse! ho!
                                         Calling loud off the Stage.
 
Enter Nurse. NURSE. Are they tormenting her again? They hae time now, when their storm and their revelry is past, to cast their cantrips here, I trow. Shaking her fist angrily. O you ugly witch! show your elrich face from behint the hangings there, an' I'll score you aboon the breath wi' a jocteleg.
LADY DUNGARREN to Nurse. Dost thou see any thing?
NURSE. I thought I just saw a waft o' her haggart visage in the dark shadow o' the bed hangings yonder. But see or no see, she is in this room, as sure as I am a Christian saul. What else shou'd mak the bairn stare sae, and wriggle wi' her body sae miserably?
DUNGARREN. But are not you a bold woman, Nurse, to threaten a witch so bloodily?
NURSE. I'm bauld enough to tak vengeance at my ain haun upon ony body that torments my bairn, though it war Satan himsel. Howsomever, I carry about a leaf o' the Bible sewed to my    pouch, now; for things hae come to sic a fearfu'
 
pitch, that crooked pins and rowan-tree do next to nae good at a'.—Bless us a'! I wush the minister war come.
DUNGARREN. And you have your wish, Nurse; for here he is.
Enter Rutherford , in a hurried, bewildered manner. LADY DUNGARREN. My good Sir, you are welcome: but my heart reproaches me for having brought you from home in such a dreadful night.—What is the matter with you?
DUNGARREN. He cannot speak.
LADY DUNGARREN. Sit down in this chair, my good Sir. He is going to faint.
                                          Dungarren supports him, and places him in an easy chair; then fetches him a glass of water, which he swallows hastily. DUNGARREN. Has the lightning touched you, dear Sir?
RUTHERFORD. Not the lightning.

 
LADY DUNGARREN. Has aught happened to you on the moor?
ANNABELLA. Have you seen any thing?—He has seen something.
DUNGARREN. Have you seen any thing, my good Sir?
RUTHERFORD. Nought, by God's grace, that had any power to hurt me.
DUNGARREN. But you have seen something which has overcome your mind to an extraordinary degree. Were another man in your case, I should say that superstitious fears had o'ermaster'd him, and    played tricks with his imagination.
RUTHERFORD. What is natural or unnatural, real or imaginary, who shall determine? But I have seen that, which, if I saw it not, the unassisted eyesight can give testimony to nothing.
LADY DUNGARREN and ANNABELLA both speaking together. What was it? What was it?
                                          Rutherford gives no answer.
 
DUNGARREN. You saw, then, what has moved you so much, distinctly and vividly?
RUTHERFORD. Yea, his figure and the features of his face, as distinctly, in the bright glare of the lightning, as your own now appear at this moment.
DUNGARREN. A man whom you knew, and expected not to find at such an hour and in such a place. But what of this? Might not such a thing naturally happen?
RUTHERFORD lowering his voice, and drawing Dungarren aside, while Annabella draws closer to him to listen. No, Robert Kennedy: he whose form and face I distinctly saw, has been an indweller of the grave these two years.
DUNGARREN in a low voice also. Indeed! Are you sure of it?
RUTHERFORD. I put his body into the coffin with mine own hands, and helped to carry it to the grave; yet there it stood before me, in the bright blazing of the storm, and seemed to look upon me, too, with a look of recognition most strange and horrible.

 
ANNABELLA eagerly. Whose ghost was it? Who was the dead man    you saw?
RUTHERFORD rising from his chair, and stepping back from her with displeasure. I reckoned, Madam, but upon one listener.
LADY DUNGARREN. Nay, be not angry with her. Who can well refrain from listening to such a tale? And be not angry with me neither, when I ask you one question, which it so much concerns me to know. Saw you aught besides this apparition? any witches or creatures of evil?
RUTHERFORD. I will answer that question, Lady, at another time, and in greater privacy.
ANNABELLA to Lady Dungarren . He has seen them; it is evident he has. But some of his friends might be amongst them: there may be good cause for secrecy and caution.
DUNGARREN to Annabella . Why do you press so unsparingly upon a man whose spirits have, from some cause or other, received such a shock?
RUTHERFORD. I forgive her, Dungarren: say no more about it. It is God's goodness to me that I am here
 
unhurt, again to do the duty of a Christian pastor to my dear and friendly flock now convened. Let me pray by the bed of that poor suffering child, for her, for myself, and for all here present.
LADY DUNGARREN to Annabella . Let us put her in a different position before he begin: she must be tired of that; for see, she moves again uneasily.
                                          Lady Dungarren takes Annabella to the bottom of the Stage, and they both seem employed about the child, while Dungarren and Rutherford remain on the front. DUNGARREN.    It is a most extraordinary and appalling apparition you have seen. What do you think of it?
RUTHERFORD. What can I think of it, but that the dead are sometimes permitted to revisit the earth, and that I verily have seen it.
DUNGARREN. I would more readily believe this than give credit to the senseless power and malevolence of witchcraft, which you have always held in derision.
RUTHERFORD. It is presumption to hold any thing in derision.

 
DUNGARREN. Ha! say you so, in this altered tone of voice! Have you met with any thing to-night to change your opinions on this subject? Have you seen any of the old women, so strangely spoken of, on the moor?
RUTHERFORD. Would that I had only seen such!
DUNGARREN. The voice in which you speak, the expression with which you look upon me, makes me tremble. Am I concerned with aught that you have seen?
RUTHERFORD. You are, my dear Robert, and must think no more of Violet Murrey. A deep silence. Yes; it has stricken you to the heart. Think upon it as you ought. I expect no answer.
DUNGARREN endeavouring to recover speech. But I must—I will try—I must answer you, for I— tearing open his waistcoat, and panting for breath,    —I can believe nothing that accuses her.
RUTHERFORD. Were a daughter of my own concerned, I could not be more distressed.
DUNGARREN. It makes me distracted to hear thee say so!

 
RUTHERFORD. Go to thine own room, and endeavour to compose thy mind, and I will pray for thee here. Pray for thyself, too, in private: pray earnestly, for there is, I fear, a dreadful warfare of passion abiding thee.
                                         Exit Dungarren by the front, while Rutherford joins the ladies by the sickbed, where they prepare to kneel as the Scene closes. ACT II. SCENE I. —The inside of a miserable Cottage, with a Board or coarse Table by the wall, on which stand some empty wooden Bickers or Bowls. Enter Wilkin , who runs eagerly to the board, then turns away disappointed. WILKIN. Na, na! tuim yet! a' tuim yet! Milk nane!
 
parritch nane! Pointing to the bowls, and then pressing his stomach. Tuim there! tuim here! Woe worth it! to say they wad be fou, an' they're no fou! Woe worth it! woe worth them a'!
Enter Bawldy , and Wilkin runs to take hold of him. BAWLDY frightened. Han's aff, I tell thee!
WILKIN. Hast brought ony thing? Gie me't, gie me 't.
BAWLDY pulling out a horse-shoe from his pocket. Stan' aff, I say! Nane o' your witch nips for me! I hae, maybe, brought what thou winna like, an tu hae wit enough to ken what it is.
WILKIN. Will 't kill me?
BAWLDY. Ay; fule as he is, he's frightened for 't;— the true mark of warlockry. They hae linket him in wi' the rest: naething's owre waff for Satan, an it hae a saul o' ony kind to be tint.
WILKIN. Will 't kill me?

 
BAWLDY. No: but I'll score thy imp's brow wi 't,— that's what I'll do,—an tu lay a finger on me. But dinna glow'r sae: stan' aff a bit, an answer my quastions, and there's siller for thee. Throwing him some pence. Was tu on the moor i' the night-time, wi' thy mither?
WILKIN.    Mither?
BAWLDY. Ay; was tu on the moor wi' her, whan the thunner roared?
WILKIN. Thunner roared, fire roared, thunner roared! hurl! hurl! hurl! Imitating the noise of thunder.
BAWLDY. Ay; an' ye ware there?
WILKIN. Ay, there. Nodding his head.
BAWLDY. An' wha was there beside?
WILKIN. Beside?
BAWLDY. Beside thee an' thy mither. What saw ye there?

 
WILKIN. Black man an' fire: hurl! hurl! Making a noise as before.
BAWLDY. Gude saf' us! has tu seen the deil then, bodily?
WILKIN. Deil, deil!
BAWLDY shrinking back from him. Keep me frae scathe! That I should stan' sae near ane that has been wi' Satan himsel! What did tu see forbye?
WILKIN. Saw? Saw folk.
BAWLDY. What folk? Auld women?
WILKIN. Auld women; young women. Saw them a' on fire. Hurl! hurl! hurl!
BAWLDY. Saw a young woman? Was it Maggy Kirk's crooket daughter?
WILKIN. Na, joe! young woman.
BAWLDY. What's her name? What did they ca' her?

 
WILKIN.    Leddy—young leddy, on fire.
BAWLDY. Gude saf' us a'! can this be true!
                                         Voices without. FIRST VOICE. I'll tak amends o' her for cheating us again.
SECOND VOICE. An' sae will I, spitefu' carlin! Maun naebody hae power but hersel?
Enter Mary Macmurren and Elspy Low , and Bawldy hides himself behind the door. MARY MACMURREN. There's power to be had, that's certain: power that can raise the storm and the fiend; ay, that can do ony thing. But we're aye to be puir yet: neither meat nor money, after a's dune!
ELSPY LOW. Neither vengeance nor glawmery, for a' the wicket thoughts we hae thought, for a' the fearfu' words we hae spoken, for a' the backward prayers we hae prayed!—I'll rive her eyen out o' her head, though they shou'd glare upon us frae their hollow sconces, like corpse-can'les frae a grave-stane.

 
MARY MACMURREN pointing to the board. Even thay puir cogs are as toom as before, and my puir idiot as hungry. Hast tu had ony thing, Wilkin? Turns round to him and discovers Bawldy . Ha! wha has tu wi' thee? To Bawldy . What brought thee here, in a mischief to thee! Thou's Dungarren's herd, I reckon.
BAWLDY. I came frae the tower of Dungarren wi' an errand, I wou'd hae ye to wit.
MARY MACMURREN.    Tell thy errand, then, and no lurk that gate, in a nook, like a thoumart in a dowcot: for if tu be come here without an errand, thou shalt rue it dearly to the last hour o' thy life.
BAWLDY. Isna this Grizeld Bane's house?
MARY MACMURREN. No, silly loon! it's my house. She's but a rinagate rawny, frae far awa' parts, that came to be my lodger. Ay; and she may gang as she came, for me: I'll no harbour her ony mair. Nae mair Grizeld Banes in my house, to reeve an' to herrie me sae! She maun pack aff wi' hersel this very day.

 
Enter Grizeld Bane . GRIZELD BANE looking on her with stern contempt. Who speaks of Grizeld Bane with such unwary words? Repeat them, I pray thee.  Mary stands abashed. Thou wilt not.— To Elspy , in like manner. And what hast thou to say of Grizeld Bane? A pause. And thou, too, art silent before my face.
ELSPY LOW. There's a callant frae Dungarren, i' the nook, that comes on an errand to thee.
GRIZELD BANE to Bawldy . Do not tremble so, silly child! What is thine errand?
BAWLDY. She bade me—she bade me say—ye maun come to her.
GRIZELD BANE. To whom, and where? Thou speakest as if    my hand were already on thy throat, where it shall very soon be, if thou tell not thy errand more distinctly.
BAWLDY. The stranger leddy at the tower, the Leddy
 
Annabell, desires that ye wad meet her in the lone shed, near the outer gate, in the afternoon. Gi' me an answer, an please ye.
GRIZELD BANE in a kind of chant.
Where there be ladies and where there be lords,
Mischief is making with glances and words,
Work is preparing for pistols and swords. BAWLDY. Is that an answer?
GRIZELD BANE. She may take it for one; but if it please thee better, thou may'st say to her, I will do as she desires. And take this token with thee, youngster. Going close to him.
BAWLDY. Na, na, I thank ye; I have answer enough.
                                         Exit in a fright. GRIZELD BANE turning to Mary Macmurren and Elspy Low . And ye are dissatisfied, forsooth! you must have power as you will and when you will.
ELSPY LOW. Thou hast deceived us.
GRIZELD BANE. Was there not storm enough to please ye?

 
ELSPY LOW. Enough to crack the welkin; but what got we by it?
GRIZELD BANE. Did he come in the storm? Did you not see him and hear him?
MARY MACMURREN. Certes did he; but what gat we by it? He    keepit na' his tryste wi' us the second time; an' we gaed wearily hame on our feet, as wat and as puir as we came.
GRIZELD BANE. O that false tongue! ye rode upon clouds: I saw you pass over my head, and I called to you.
MARY MACMURREN. The woman is a fiend or bereft a' thegether! I walket hame on my feet, en' gaed to my miserable bed, just as at ony ither time, an' sa did she.
GRIZELD BANE. But rode ye not afterwards, my chucks? I saw you both pass over my head, and I called to you.
ELSPY LOW. If we ware upon clouds, we ware sleeping a' the while, for I ken naething anent it. Do ye, neighbour? To Mary Macmurren .

 
MARY MACMURREN. I dare na' just say as ye say, kimmer, for I dreamt I was flying in the air and somebody behint me.
GRIZELD BANE. Ay, ay, ay; ye will discern mist and mysteries at last. But ye must have power, forsooth! as ye list and when ye list. If he did not keep tryste in the night, let us cast a spell for him in the day. When doors and windows are darkened, mid-day is as potent as midnight. Shut out the light and begin. But if he roar and rage at    you when he does come, that is no fault of mine.
                                         Draws a circle on the floor. MARY MACMURREN and ELSPY LOW at once. Na, na! dinna bring him up now.
                                         Exeunt hastily, leaving Grizeld alone. GRIZELD BANE chanting to herself after having completed the circle.
Black of mien and stern of brow,
Dark one, dread one, hear me now!
Come with potency and speed;
Come to help me in my need.
Kith and kindred have I none,
Ever wand'ring, ever lone.
Black of mien and stern of brow,
Dark one, dread one, hear me now! He is now at hand; the floor yawns under my feet, and the walls are running round; he is
 
here! bending her head very low and then raising it. Ha! is it thou? art thou risen in thy master's stead? It becomes thee to answer my call; it is no weak tie that has bound us together. I loved thee in sin and in blood: when the noose of death wrung thee, I loved thee. And now thou art a dear one and a terrible with the Prince of the power of the air. Grant what I ask! grant it quickly. Give me of thy power; I have earned it. But this is a mean, narrow den; the cave of the lin is near, where water is soughing and fern is waving; the bat-bird clutching o'er head, and the lithe snake stirring below;    to the cave, to the cave! we'll hold our council there.
                                         Exit with frantic gestures, as if courteously showing the way to some great personage. SCENE II. A Flower Garden by the cottage of Violet Murrey , with the building partly occupying the bottom of the Stage, and partly concealed. Enter Dungarren , who stops and looks round him, then mutters to himself in a low voice, then speaks audibly. DUNGARREN. The lily, and the rose, and the gillyflower;
 
things the most beautiful in nature, planted and cherished by a hand as fair and as delicate as themselves! Innocence and purity should live here; ay, and do live here: shall the ambiguous whisper of a frightened night-scared man, be his understanding and learning what they may, shake my confidence in this? It was foolish to come on such an errand. Turns back, and is about to retire by the way he entered, then seems irresolute, and then stops short. Yet being here, I had better have some parley with her: I may learn incidentally from her own lips, what will explain the whole seeming mystery. Looking again on the flowers as he proceeds towards the house. Pretty pansey! thou hast been well tended since I brought thee from the south country with thy pretty friend, the carnation by thy side. Ay, and ye are companions still; thou, too, hast been well cared for, and all thy swelling buds will open to the sun ere long.
Enter Violet from the house, while he is stooping over the flowers. VIOLET. You are come to look after your old friends, Dungarren?
DUNGARREN. I have friends here worth looking after, if
 
beauty and sweetness give value. Thou art an excellent gardener, Violet; things thrive with    thee wonderfully, even as if they were conscious whose flowers they are, and were proud of it.
VIOLET. Ah! that were no cause for pride. Methinks, if they were conscious whose flowers they are, they would droop their heads and wither away.
DUNGARREN. Say not so: thou art melancholy; the storm has affected thy spirits. Those who were abroad in it say that the lightning was tremendous.
VIOLET. It was tremendous.
DUNGARREN. And the rolling of the thunder was awful.
VIOLET. It was awful.
DUNGARREN. And the moor was at times one blaze of fiery light, like returning bursts of mid-day, giving every thing to view for an instant in the depth of midnight darkness. A pause. One who was there told me so. Another pause, and she seems uneasy. And more than that, a strange unlikely story. A still longer pause, and she more uneasy. But thou hast no desire to hear
 
it: even natural curiosity has forsaken thee. What is the matter?
VIOLET. Nothing is the matter: tell me whatever you please, and I will listen to it. Were witches on the moor?
DUNGARREN. Yes, witches were there, but that is not my    story. There was a form seen on the moor most unlike any thing that could be evil. Thou art pale and disturbed; hast thou a guess of my meaning?
VIOLET. The moor is wide, and benighted wanderers might be upon it of different forms and degrees.
DUNGARREN. But none who could look like one, whom, nevertheless, 'tis said, it did resemble.
VIOLET endeavouring to recover herself. Nay, nay, Dungarren! do not amuse yourself with me: if the devil has power to assume what form he pleases, that will account for your story at once. If he has not, you have only to suppose that some silly girl, with her plaid over her head, was bewildered by the storm at her trysting place, and that will explain it sufficiently.

 
DUNGARREN. These are light words, methinks, to follow upon melancholy gravity so suddenly.
VIOLET. If my words displease you, Dungarren, there is more cause for sorrow than surprise, and the sooner I cease to offend the better.
DUNGARREN. Violet Murrey of Torewood!!!
VIOLET. Robert Kennedy of Dungarren!!!
DUNGARREN. What am I to think?
VIOLET. Thoughts are free: take your range. Thinking is better than speaking for both of us; and    so, if you please, we shall wish each other good morning. Turning from him with a hurried step towards the house.
DUNGARREN following her. We must not so part, my Violet. Had any woman but thyself used me thus,—but what of that! I love thee and must bear with thee.
VIOLET. No, Robert Kennedy; thou lovest me not: for there is suspicion harboured in thy mind which love would have spurned away.

 
DUNGARREN. Say not harboured . O no! Spurned and rejected, yet, like a trodden adder, turning and rearing again. I ask to know nothing that thou seekest to conceal. Say only that thou wert in thy own home during the night, as I am sure thou wert, and I will be satisfied, though all the diabolical witnesses of Renfrewshire were set in array against thee.
VIOLET. Must I be forced to bear witness in my own behalf? There is one who should bear witness for me, and lacking that evidence, I scorn every other.
DUNGARREN. And where is that witness to be found?
VIOLET. In the heart of Dungarren.
DUNGARREN. Thou wring'st it to the quick! I am proud and impetuous, but have I deserved this haughty reserve? Dost thou part with me in anger?
VIOLET.    I am angry, and must leave thee; but perhaps I am wrong in being so.
DUNGARREN. Indeed thou art wrong.

 
VIOLET. Be thou charitable, then, and forgive me; but for the present let us part.
                                         Exit into the house. DUNGARREN alone. Her behaviour is strange and perplexing. Was her anger assumed or sincere? Was she, or was she not, on that accursed moor? “Some silly girl bewildered by the storm at her trysting place,”—were not these her words? Ay, by my faith! and glancing at the truth too obviously; at the hateful, the distracting, the hitherto unsuspected truth. It is neither witch, warlock, nor devil, with whom she held her tryste. Yea, but it is a devil, whom I will resist to perdition! It is a devil who will make me one also. O, this proud rising of my heart! it gives the cruelty of distraction; and, but for the fear of God within me, would nerve my hand for blood.
Re-enter Violet , in alarm, from the house. VIOLET. Oh Robert, Robert! what mean those tossings of the arms—those gestures of distraction? You doubt my faith, you think me unworthy, and it moves you to this fearful degree. If I deserve your attachment I deserve to be trusted.
 
   Think of this, dear Robert, for it kills me to see you so miserable.
DUNGARREN. Dear! you call me dear, only because you pity me.
VIOLET. I call thee dear, because—because—Out on thee, Robert Kennedy! hast thou no more generosity than this? Bursting into tears.
DUNGARREN catching her in his arms, then unclasping her suddenly and dropping on his knee. O forgive me, forgive me! I have treated thee ungenerously and unjustly: forgive me, my own sweet girl!
VIOLET. I will not only forgive thee, but tell thee every thing when I am at liberty to do so. Let us now separate; I have need of rest.
                                         He leads her towards the house, caressing her hand tenderly as they go; then exeunt severally.
 
SCENE III. A Passage or Entrance-room in the Tower. Enter Anderson . ANDERSON looking off the Stage. What's the cunning loon standing, wi' his lug sae near that door for? Calling loud. What's tu doing there, rascal? Enter Bawldy . Wha gies thee leave to come near the chambers o' gentle folks, and lay thy blackened lug sae close to the key-hole?
BAWLDY. As for gentle folks, they come to me oftener nor I gang to them; and as for my lug, there was nae need to lay it to the key-hole whan the door was half open.
ANDERSON. Catch thee who can unprovided wi' a ready answer! Thou hast the curiosity o' the deevil in thee and his cunning to boot: what business hast thou to pry into people's secrets?

 
BAWLDY. A secret, forsooth, tauld wi' an open door and voices as loud as twa wives cracking in the lone! And gude be wi' us a'! they war only talking o' what we are a' talking or thinking o' fra' morning till night and fra' Sabbath day till Saturday.
ANDERSON. And what is that, ne'er-do-weel?
BAWLDRY. What should it be but witchcraft and the young leddy? But this last bout, I trow, is the strangest bout of a'.
ANDERSON. What has happened now?
BAWLDY.    As I was passing by the door, I heard Nurse tell the Leddy Annabell how the young leddy was frightened frae her rest, as she lay in her bed, wi' the room darkened.
ANDERSON. And how was that?
BAWLDY. Witches cam' into the room, I canna tell how mony o' them, and ane o' them cam' upon the bed, and a'maist smoored her.
ANDERSON. The Lord preserve us!

 
BAWLDY. Ay; and she would hae been smoored a'thegither, gin she had na claught haud of the witch's arm, and squeezed it sae hard that the witch ran awa', and left a piece o' her gown sleeve in the young leddy's han'.
ANDERSON. It was Grizeld Bane or Mary Macmurren, I'll be bound for't.
BAWLDY. Wha it was she could na say, for she could na see i' the dark.
ANDERSON. But the piece of the gown sleeve will reveal it. Show me that, and I'll ken wha it was, to a certainty. I ken ilka gown and garment belanging to them.
BAWLDY. So does Nurse, too: but the young leddy took a fit, as the roodies left the chaumer, and she has lost the clout.
ANDERSON.    That was a pity. The chamber maun be searched for it carefully, else they'll come again, and wi' some cantrup or ither, join it into the sleeve it was riven frae, as if it ne'er had been riven at a'. But gang to thy crowdy, man, and dinna tine a meal for a marvel. Thou hast nae business
 
here: the kitchen and the byre set thee better than lobbies and chambers. Exit Bawldy . That callant lurks about the house like a brownie. He's a clever varlet, too: he can read the kittle names in the Testament, and ding the dominie himsel at the quastions and caratches. He's as cunning and as covetous as ony gray-haired sinner i' the parish;—a convenient tool, I suspect, in the hands of a very artful woman.
                                         Exit. SCENE IV. The Apartment of Annabella , who enters, and throws herself into a chair, remaining silent for a short time, and then speaks impatiently. ANNABELLA. What can detain her so long? Could she miss finding him? He is seldom far off at this hour of the day, when broth and beef are on the board; and he can send a boy to the hill as his substitute. I wish the sly creature were come; for time passes away, and with it, perhaps, opportunity.
Enter Phemy . PHEMY. He's here, Madam.

 
ANNABELLA. That's well. Let him enter immediately, and do thou keep watch in the outer room. Exit Phemy , and presently Bawldy enters. I want thee to do an errand for me again, Bawldy. Do not look so grave and so cowed, man: thou shalt be well paid for it.
BAWLDY. A'tweel, I'm ready enough to do ony errand, gin there be nae witchery concerned wi't.
ANNABELLA. And what the worse wilt thou be if there should? Didst thou not go to Grizeld Bane this morning, and return safe and sound as before, both soul and body, with a good crown in thy pocket to boot?
BAWLDY. Certes my body cam' back safe enough; but for my puir saul, Lord hae mercy on it! for when I gaed to my kye on the hill again, I tried to croon o'er to mysel the hunder and saxteen psalm, and second commandment, and could    hardly remember a word o' them. Oh! she's an awfu' witch, and scares the very wit frae ane's noddle.

 
ANNABELLA. Never fear, Bawldy: she has left thee enough of that behind to take care of thine own interest. Thou hadst wit enough, at least, to do thy business with her; for she came to me in good time, to the spot which I appointed.
BAWLDY. If she kens the place, she may meet you there again, without my ganging after her. The Lord preserve us! I wadna enter that house again for twa crowns.
ANNABELLA. Be not afraid, man: it is not to that house I would send thee; and thou shalt have two crowns for thy errand, though it be both an easy and a short one.
BAWLDY. As for that, Madam, an it war baith lang an' hard, I wadna mind it, so as it be an errand a Christian body may do.
ANNABELLA. A Christian body may go and speak a few words privately to Mrs. Violet Murrey's pretty maid, I should think.
BAWLDY sheepishly. There's nae great harm in that, to be sure.

 
ANNABELLA. And a Christian body may slip a crown quietly into her hand, and—
BAWLDY interrupting her in a low murmuring voice.    Ay, ane o' the twa ye spak o'.
ANNABELLA. No, indeed, Bawldy; a third crown, which I will give thee to take from thine own pocket, and put into her pretty hand.—Perhaps it may prove the forerunner of some other token between you. She is a good tight girl, but a few years older than thyself: she may take a fancy to thee.
BAWLDY. Ah! Madam Annabell, somebody has been telling you that I hae a fancy for her; for they never devall wi' their havers.—But what is she to do for the crown? for I reckon she maun won it some way or anither.
ANNABELLA. In a very easy way. Tell her to send me her mistress's striped lutestring gown, for I want to look at the pattern of it, and will restore it to her immediately.

 
BAWLDY. Is that a'?
ANNABELLA. Only thou must make her promise to conceal, from her mistress and from every body, that I borrowed the gown. Be sure to do that, Bawldy.
BAWLDY. That's very curious, now. Whaur wad be the harm o' telling that ye just looket at it.
ANNABELLA. Thou'rt so curious, boy, there's no concealing any thing from thee. Art thou silly enough    to believe that I only want to look at it?
BAWLDY. Na, I guessed there was somewhat ahint it.
ANNABELLA. And thou shalt know the whole, if thou wilt promise to me solemnly not to tell any body.
BAWLDY. I'll tell naebody. Gif my ain mither war to speer, she wad ne'er get a word anent it frae me.
ANNABELLA. I have been consulting with Grizeld Bane, about what can be done to relieve our poor sick child from her misery,—for those who put her into it can best tell how to draw her out of it,— and she says, a garment that has been upon the
 
body of a murderer, or the child of a murderer, —it does not matter which,—put under the pillow of a witched bairn, will recover it from fits, were it ever so badly tormented. But, mark me well! should the person who owns the garment ever come to the knowledge of it, the fits will return again, as bad as before. Dost thou understand me?
BAWLDY. I understand you weel enough: but will witches speak the truth, whan the deil is their teacher?
ANNABELLA. Never trouble thy head about that: we can but try. Fetch me the gown from thy sweetheart, and thou shalt have more money than this,    by and by. Gives him money.
BAWLDY. Since you will ca' her my sweetheart, I canna help it; though I ken weel enough it's but mocking.
ANNABELLA. Go thy ways, and do as I bid thee, without loss of time, and thou wilt soon find it good, profitable earnest. She will make a very good thrifty wife, and thou a good muirland drover, when thou'rt old enough.
                                         Exit Bawldy .
 
ANNABELLA alone. Now shall I have what I panted for, and far better, too, than I hoped. To be tormented by witchcraft is bad; but to be accused and punished for it is misery so exquisite, that, to purchase it for an enemy, were worth a monarch's ransom. Ay, for an enemy like this, who has robbed me of my peace, stolen the affections of him whom I have loved so ardently and so long; yea, who has made me, in his sight, hateful and despicable. I will bear my agony no longer. The heart of Dungarren may be lost for ever; but revenge is mine, and I will enjoy it.—It is a fearful and dangerous pleasure, but all that is left for me. —Oh, oh! that I should live to see him the doating lover of a poor, homely—for homely she is, let the silly world call her what they    please—artful girl, disgraced and degraded; the daughter of a murderer, saved only from the gibbet by suicide or accident! That I should live to witness this!—But having lived to witness it, can revenge be too dearly purchased? No; though extremity of suffering in this world, and beyond this world, were the price—Cease, cease! ye fearful thoughts! I shall but accuse her of that of which she is, perhaps, really guilty. Will this be so wicked, so unpardonable? How could a creature like this despoil such a woman
 
as myself of the affections of Dungarren, or any man, but by unholy arts?
Enter Phemy in alarm. PHEMY. Madam, Madam! there are people in the passage.
ANNABELLA. And what care I for that?
PHEMY. You were speaking so loud, I thought there was somebody with you. Looking fearfully round.
ANNABELLA. Whom dost thou look for? Could any one be here without passing through the outer room?
PHEMY. I crave your pardon, Madam, they can enter by holes, as I have heard say, that would keep out a moth or a beetle.
ANNABELLA. Go, foolish creature! Thy brain is wild with the tales thou hast heard in this house.—Did I    speak so loud?
PHEMY. Ay, truly, Madam, and with such violent
 
changes of voice, that I could not believe you alone.
ANNABELLA. I was not aware of it. It is a natural infirmity, like talking in one's sleep: my mother had the same.—I'll go to the garden, where the flowers and fresh air will relieve me.
PHEMY. Are you unwell?
ANNABELLA. Yes, girl; but say so to no one, I pray thee.
                                         Exeunt. ACT III. SCENE I. —A half-formed Cave, partly roofed with rock and partly open to the sky, which is seen through the overhanging bushes; a Burn or Brook crossing the mouth of it, at the bottom of the Stage, banked by precipitous rocks mixed with wood and fern. VOICE heard without. Indeed, thou canst not pass this way.

 
SECOND VOICE without. I don't mind it at all; the water will do me no harm.
FIRST VOICE without. Thou shalt not wet thy feet, my dear child, when a father's arms are here, so able and so happy to carry thee.
Enter Murrey by the mouth of the cave, bearing Violet in his arms, whom he sets down by some loose rocks near the front of the Stage. VIOLET. Set me down, my dear father; I am heavy.
MURREY. I could carry thee to the world's end, my own dear girl. O that thou wert again a baby, and mine arms lock'd round thee as of yore!
VIOLET. I remember it, father.
MURREY. Dost thou, sweet one? Ah, ah! thee in my arms, and she whom I loved by my side, and thy pretty worldless lips cooing to us by turns —an utterance that made all words contemptible! Alas, alas! such days, and many bright succeeding days have been and are gone. The fatal passion of a few short moments has made
 
me a homeless outlaw, while reproach, instead of protection, is a father's endowment for thee.
Sits down on a low detached rock, and buries his face in the folds of his plaid. VIOLET. Dear, dear father! do not reproach yourself so harshly. If the world call what you have done by a very dreadful name, it is not a true one: equal fighting, though for a foolish quarrel,    deserves not that appellation.
MURREY. Whatever it may deserve, it will have it, when there is no witness to prove the contrary. Fatheringham alone was present, and he disappeared on the instant. When my trial came, I could not prove that the man I had slain fell in equal combat; nay, was the real aggressor in first attacking me.
VIOLET. It was cowardly and strange,—it was not the act of a friend to disappear and leave you so exposed.
MURREY. Some evil fate befell him: he was not alive, I am certain, when I was apprehended, else he would have come forward like an honest, manly friend in my justification. The sentence of death
 
is upon me; the mark of Cain is on my forehead; I am driven from the fellowship of men.
VIOLET. Say not so; for you have by the accidental death of your servant been, as it were, providentially saved from a fearful end; and being so saved, I must needs believe that some better fortune is in reserve for you.
MURREY. Ay, poor Donald! I believe he would willingly have died for my sake, and Providence did so dispose of him. I little thought, after my escape    from prison, when I had changed apparel with him, how completely our identity was to be confounded. He lies in the grave as James Murrey of Torwood,—in an unhallowed grave, as a murderer.
VIOLET. Were you near him when he fell into the pit?
MURREY. Dear Violet, thou art bewildered to ask me such a question! When we had changed clothes completely, and I had even forced upon him as a gift, which he well deserved, the gold watch and seals of my family, we parted; and when his body was discovered, many weeks afterwards, the face, as I understand, from the mutilations of bruises and corruption, was no longer recognizable.
 
But this is a mournful subject, and it is useless to dwell upon it now.
VIOLET. Very true; let us speak of those things for which there is still cause of thankfulness. The Irish home you have found on the mountains of Wicklow, is it not a pleasant one?
MURREY. Pleasant to those who look on sky and cliff, on wood and torrent, to rouse and refresh the mind, in the intervals of such retirement as hath a purpose and a limit. To the lonely outcast what scene is pleasant? The meanest man who plies    his honest trade in the narrow lane of a city, where passers-by may wish him a good day, or bid God speed him, has a domicile and a home which I think of with envy.
VIOLET. O do not, then, live any longer in this deserted situation!
MURREY. I know what thou wilt offer, but it must not be.
VIOLET. Why so? Since I have lost my dear mother, and have no farther duties to detain me here, may I not cross the sea with you now, and spend
 
some time with you in Wicklow. It will be thought that I am gone to visit our Irish relation.
MURREY. No, my affectionate child, that may not be.
VIOLET. I should go to our relation first, and nobody should know that I went anywhere else but Dungarren; nor should I even tell it to him without your permission.
MURREY rising quickly from his seat. Which thou shalt never have.
VIOLET. Why do you utter those words so vehemently? He is honourable and true.
MURREY. He is thy lover, and thou believest him to be so.
VIOLET. Are you displeased that he is my lover?
MURREY. Yes, I am displeased, for he will never be thy    husband.
VIOLET. O think not so hardly of him! in his heart there is honour even stronger than affection. And if I might but tell him of your being alive—

 
MURREY. Art thou mad? art thou altogether bereft of understanding? Swear to me, on the faith of a Christian woman, that thou wilt never reveal it.
VIOLET. He is incapable of betraying any one, and far less—
MURREY. Hold thy tongue! hold thy tongue, simple creature! Every man seems true to the woman whose affections he hath conquered. I know the truth of man and the weakness of woman. Reason not with me on the subject, but solemnly promise to obey me. I should feel myself as one for whom the rope and the gibbet are preparing, should any creature but thyself know of my being alive.
VIOLET. Woe is me! this is misery indeed.
MURREY. Do not look on me thus with such mingled pity and surprise. Call what I feel an excess of distrust—a disease—a perversion of mind, if thou wilt, but solemnly promise to obey me.
VIOLET. Let my thoughts be what they may, I dare    not resist the will of a parent; I solemnly promise
 
looking up to heaven, and then bending her head very low.
MURREY. I am satisfied, and shall return to my boat, which waits for me on the Clyde, near the mouth of this burn, with a mind assured on so important a point, and assured of thy good conduct and affection. Looking about, alarmed. I hear a noise.
VIOLET. 'Tis the moving of some owlet or hawk in the refts of the rock over-head. To this retired spot of evil report no human creature ever ventures to come, even at mid-day.
MURREY. Yes, I remember it used to be called the Warlock's den, and had some old legendary pretensions to the name. But there is a noise. Looks up to the open part of the cave, and discovers Dungarren above, looking down upon them.
VIOLET. It is Dungarren; what shall we do? Begone, father?
MURREY. I must stand to it now; he will be down upon us in an instant: it is too late to avoid him.

 
VIOLET. No, it is not; he shall not come down. Calling up to him. Robert Kennedy, is it thou?
DUNGARREN above. Does the voice of Violet Murrey dare to ask me the question?
VIOLET. Stay where thou art, and come no farther; I dare ask of thee to be secret and to be generous.
DUNGARREN above.    Distracting and mysterious creature, I obey thee. Retires.
VIOLET. He retires, and we are safe. Let us now separate. In a low voice. Farewell, my dear father! you will come and see me again?
MURREY. I hope next summer to pay thee another and a less hurried visit. Farewell. Holding her back. No, no! do not embrace me.
VIOLET. He has retired, and will not look again.
MURREY. Be not too confident. Farewell, and remember thy solemn promise. My ship will sail for
 
Ireland to-morrow morning early, and thou shalt hear from me soon.
                                         Exit by the way he entered. VIOLET alone. If they should meet without, and they may do so!—But that must not be. Calling in a loud voice. Dungarren, Dungarren! art thou still within hearing?  Dungarren reappears above. I cannot speak to thee in so loud a voice; come down to me here.                                          He descends by the jutting rocks into the bottom of the cave in the dress and accoutrements of an angler, with a fishingrod in his hand, and stands before her with a stern and serious look, remaining perfectly silent. O Robert Kennedy! look not on me thus! I meant to thank you for your friendly forbearance, but now I have no utterance: I cannot speak to you when you so look upon me.
DUNGARREN. Silence is best where words were vain and worthless.
VIOLET.    You deserve thanks, whether you accept them or not.

 
DUNGARREN. To obey the commands of a lady deserves none.
VIOLET. Nay, but it does, and I thank you most gratefully. He who was with me is gone, but— but—
DUNGARREN. But will return again, no doubt, when the face of a casual intruder will not interrupt your conference.
VIOLET. O no! he will not return—may never return. Who he is, and where he goes, and how I am bound to him, O how I long to tell thee all, and may not!
DUNGARREN. What I have seen with mine eyes leaves you nothing to tell which I am concerned to hear.
VIOLET. Be it so, then; since the pride of your heart so far outmates its generosity.
DUNGARREN. You have put it out of my power to be generous; but you desire me to be secret, and shall be obeyed. Is it your pleasure, madam, that I should conduct you to your home, since he who was with you is gone?

 
VIOLET. That I accept of a service so offered, shows too well how miserably I am circumstanced. But I do accept it: let me leave this place.
                                         Goes toward the mouth of the cave. DUNGARREN.    Not by the burn, the water is too deep.
VIOLET. I came by it, and there is no other way.
DUNGARREN. Came by it, and dry-shod too! Looking at her feet. He who was with thee must have carried thee in his arms.
VIOLET. Yes, he did so; but now I will walk through the stream: wet feet will do me no injury.
DUNGARREN. There is another passage through a cleft rock on this side, concealed by the foxglove and fern.
VIOLET. Lead on, then, and I'll follow.
                                         Exeunt.
 
SCENE II. A large Hall or Entrance-room, with deer's horns and arms hanging on the walls. Enter Nurse with a tankard in her hand, followed presently by Anderson , who calls after her as she is about to disappear by the opposite side. ANDERSON. Nurse, Nurse, I say! Is the woman deaf?
NURSE. What are ye roaring after me for? Can a body get nae peace or comfort ony time o' the day or night? Neither o' them, by my trouth, bring muckle rest to me.
ANDERSON. That may be, but ye'r tankard comforts, that belang, as it wad seem, to baith day and night, maun be stinted at present; for the sheriff and a' his rascally officers frae Paisley are at the yett, and writers beside, Lord preserve us! wi' inkhorns at their buttons and paper in their hands. Gae tell the Leddy quickly, and set ye'r tankard down.

 
NURSE. For the sheriff officers to lay their lugs in. Na, na! sma'er browst may serve them; I'll mak' sure o'some o't. Takes a drink, and exit.
ANDERSON. I wonder whaur the laird is: its an unchancy time for him to be out of the gaet. Donald, Donald! Enter Donald . Whaur's the laird? He should be here to receive the sheriff.
DONALD. He's no in the house.
ANDERSON. Gang and find him in the fields, then.
DONALD. He's no in the fields, neither.
ANDERSON.    Whaur is he, then?
DONALD. He'll be a clever fellow, I reckon, that finds him on the hither side o' Dumbarton.
ANDERSON. How dost tu ken that sa weel? What suld tak him to Dumbarton?

 
DONALD. His ain ill humour, I believe, for he returned fra' the fishing wi' his knit brows as grumly as a thunner cloud on the peak o' Benloman, and desired me to saddle his meir: and he took the road to the ferry without speaking anither word; and the last sight I gat o' the meir and him was frae the black craig head, whan they war baith in the boat thegether, half way over the Clyde.
ANDERSON. That's unlucky: I maun gang to the yett and receive the sheriff mysel, as creditably as I can.
DONALD. Ye may save yoursel that trouble, I trow, for he has made his way into the house already.
Enter the Sheriff with his Officers and Attendants, and Servants of the family following them. SHERIFF to Anderson . We would see the Laird of Dungarren.
ANDERSON. He's frae hame, an please your honour.
SHERIFF. From home! are you sure of this? we come on no unfriendly errand.

 
ANDERSON. I mak' nae dout o' that, your honour: but he is frae hame, and far a-field, too.
SHERIFF. That is unfortunate; for I am here officially to examine the members of his household. His    mother, I presume, is at home?
ANDERSON. Yes, your honour; the leddy is at hame, and will come to you immediately.
SHERIFF. It is said you have been disturbed with strange noises and visitations in this family, and that the young lady is more tormented than ever. What kind of noises have been heard?
ANDERSON. O Lord, your honour, sic elrich din! I can compare it to nothing. Sometimes it's like the soughing o' wind; sometimes like the howling o' dogs.
DONALD taking the word from him. Sometimes like the mewling o' cats; sometimes like the clattering o' broomsticks.
FIRST SERVANT pressing forward, and taking the word from Donald . Sometimes like the hooting o' howlets; and sometimes like a black sow grunting.

 
SHERIFF. A black sow grunting!
DONALD. Ay, please your honour. The grunt of a black sow is as deil-like as its colour: I wad ken't, in the dark, frae ony white sow that ever wore a snout.
SHERIFF. Well, sometimes hooting of owlets, and the grunting of a black sow.
ANDERSON, DONALD, and FIRST SERVANT all speaking at once. And sometimes like a—
SHERIFF. Spare me, spare me, good folks! I can listen but to one at a time. Enter Lady Dungarren, Annabella, Phemy , Nurse, and Maid-servants.    Good day, and my good service to you, Lady Dungarren. I'm sorry the laird is from home: my visit may perhaps disturb you.
LADY DUNGARREN. Do not say so, Sheriff; I am at all times glad to see you; but were it otherwise, we are too well accustomed to be disturbed in this miserable house, to think much of any thing.

 
SHERIFF. I am very sorry for it,—very sorry that your daughter continues so afflicted.— Showing her a paper. Have you any knowledge of this paper? The information contained in it is the cause of my present intrusion.
LADY DUNGARREN after having looked over it attentively. I know nothing of the paper itself; but the information it conveys is true.
SHERIFF. Have you ever seen the hand-writing before?
LADY DUNGARREN. No—yes—I think I have. Look at it, Annabella: it is somewhat like your own.
ANNABELLA in a hurried manner. Dear Madam, how can you say so? The l's, and the m's, and the n's are all joined stiffly together, and you know very well that I never join my letters at all.
LADY DUNGARREN. Very true, cousin; I see there is a great difference now, and I don't know whose hand it is, though doubtless the hand of a friend; for we cannot remain in this misery much longer. It    should be examined into, that the guilty may be
 
punished, and prevented from destroying my poor child entirely.
SHERIFF. Has any person of evil repute been admitted to see her? Who has been in her chamber?
LADY DUNGARREN. Who has been visibly in her chamber, we can easily tell; but who has been invisibly there, the Lord in heaven knows.
SHERIFF. Have they never been visible to the child herself whom they torment?
LADY DUNGARREN. She has stared, as though she saw them.
ANNABELLA. She has shrieked, as though they laid hold of her.
NURSE. She has clenched her hands, as if she had been catching at them, in this way. Showing how.
PHEMY. Ay, and moved her lips so showing how , as if speaking to them. I saw her do it.
NURSE. And so did I; and saw her grin, and shake her head so, most piteously.

 
PHEMY, NURSE, and MAID-SERVANT all speaking at once. And I saw her—
SHERIFF. Softly, softly, good women! Three tellers are too many for one tale, and three tales are too many for one pair of ears to take in at a time. — Turning to the Lady. Has she ever told you that she saw witches by her bed-side?
LADY DUNGARREN.    Yes; several times she has told me so, in wild and broken words.
SHERIFF. Only in that manner.
ANNABELLA. You forget, Madam, to mention to the Sheriff, that she told us distinctly, a few hours ago, how a witch had been sitting on her breast, as she lay in bed; and that, when she struggled to get rid of her, she rent a piece from the sleeve of her gown.
SHERIFF. The witch rent the sleeve from her gown?
NURSE. No, no, your honour; our poor child rent a piece frae the sleeve o' the witch's gown.
SHERIFF. Has the piece been found?

 
A great many, speaking at once. Ay, ay! it has! it has!
SHERIFF. Silence, I say!— To Annabella . Have the goodness to answer, Madam: has the rag been preserved?
ANNABELLA. It has, Sir; but it is no rag, I assure you.
NURSE. As good silk, your honour, as ever came frae the Luckenbooths of Edinburgh.
SHERIFF. Are not witches always old and poor? The devil must have helped this one to a new gown, at least; and that is more than we have ever heard of his doing to any of them before.
ANNABELLA. We have read of witches who have been neither    old nor poor.
SHERIFF. Ha! is there warranty, from sober sensible books, for such a notion? I am no great scholar on such points: it may be so.—But here comes the minister: his better learning will assist us. Enter Mr. Rutherford . I thank you, my reverend Sir, for obeying my
 
notice so quickly. Your cool head will correct our roused imaginations: you believe little, I have heard, of either apparitions or witches.
RUTHERFORD. My faith on such subjects was once, indeed, but weak.
SHERIFF. And have you changed it lately?— A pause for Rutherford to answer, but he is silent. Since when has your faith become stronger?
After a short pause as before, several Voices call out eagerly— Since the storm on Friday night; when Mary Macmurren and a' the crew were on the moor.
SHERIFF. Silence, I say again! Can the minister not answer for himself, without your assistance?— You heard my question, Mr. Rutherford: were you upon the moor on that night?
RUTHERFORD. I was.
SHERIFF. And saw you aught upon the moor contrary to godliness and nature?
RUTHERFORD. What I saw, I will declare in fitter time and place, if I must needs do so.

 
SHERIFF. Well, well, you are cautious, good Sir; and,    perhaps, it is wise to be so.—Lady Dungarren, with your permission, I will go into the sick chamber and examine your daughter myself.
LADY DUNGARREN. You have my permission most willingly. Follow me immediately, if you please, and ask the poor child what questions you think fit. Mr. Rutherford, do you choose to accompany us?
                                         Exeunt Lady Dungarren, Annabella , Sheriff, and Rutherford; Anderson , Nurse, Donald , &c. &c. remaining. ANDERSON. And he'll gie nae answer at a', even to the Sheriff.
NURSE. Certes, were he ten times a minister, he should hae tauld what he saw to the Sheriff of the county.
DONALD. A gentleman born and bred, and the king's appointed officer into the bargain.
NURSE. And he winna tell what he saw afore us, forsooth —for that's what he means by fitter time and place—foul befa' his discretion! He wadna
 
believe in witches, I trow; but they hae cowed him weel for't at last.
ANDERSON. To be sure, he looket baith ghastly and wan, when the Sheriff speered what he saw upon the moor.
NURSE. Ay, ay, it was some fearfu' sight, nae doubt. God's grace preserve us a'! the very thought o' what it might be gars my head grow cauld like    a turnip.
DONALD. It was surely something waur than witches dancing that frightened the minister.
NURSE. As ye say, Donald: either Highlander or Lowlander has wit enough to guess that. I like nane o' your ministers that'll speak naewhere but in the pu'pit. Fitter time and place, quotha!
ANDERSON. Hoot, toot, woman! he has gotten his lear at the college, and he thinks shame to be frightened.
NURSE. Foul befa' him and his lear too! It maun be o' some new-fangled kind, I think. Our auld minister had lear enough, baith Hebrew and Latin, and he believed in witches and warlocks, honest man, like ony ither sober, godly person.

 
ANDERSON. So he did, Nurse; ye're a sensible woman, but somewhat o' the loudest, whan ye're angry. Thae gude folks want some refection, I trow; and there 's gude yill and ham in the buttery.— Come, Sirs, follow me.
                                         Exit, with a courteous motion of the hand, followed by the Sheriff's Officers, &c. Phemy and Nurse remaining. NURSE. Whaur can Black Bauldy be a' this while? His smooty face is seldom missing whan ony mischief is ganging on?
PHEMY. What do you want with him?
NURSE. To send him owre the craft for the new-laid eggs, that the ploughman's wife promised us.
PHEMY.    He has been sent further off on another errand already.
NURSE. And wha sent him, I should like to ken, whan we are a' sae thrang?
PHEMY. My lady sent him.

 
NURSE. Your leddy, say ye! She has grown unco intimate wi' that pawky loon o' late: I wish gude may come o't. I maun gang for the eggs mysel, I warrant.—But I maun e'en gang first to the chaumer door, and listen a wee; though we'll only hear the hum o' their voices, an our lugs war as gleg as the coley's.
PHEMY. And I'll go with you too: the hum of their voices is worth listening for, if nothing more can be heard.
                                         Exeunt. ACT IV. Scene I. —An open Space before the Abbey Church of Paisley. Enter the Sheriff and Rutherford , in earnest discourse. SHERIFF. Yes, you may, indeed, be well assured that I have never, during all the years in which I have
 
served the office of sheriff of this county, performed a duty so painful; and I am very sensible that what I am compelled to summon you to perform, is still more distressing.
RUTHERFORD. Were it not sinful, I could wish myself incapable, from disease or disaster, or any other let, of giving legal testimony. Oh! to think of it clouds my brain with confusion, and makes me sick at heart! Violet Murrey, the young, the unfortunate, the gentle, and, I firmly believe, the innocent, —to give evidence to her prejudice,—it is a fearful duty
SHERIFF. It is so, good Sir; yet it must be done. I have taken into custody, on accusation of witchcraft, the fairest woman in the west of Scotland; and you must answer on oath to the questions that may be put to you, whether it be for or against her. If she be innocent, Providence will protect her.
Enter the Chief Baillie of Paisley behind them, and listens to the conclusion of the above speech. BAILLIE. If she be innocent! Can any one reasonably suppose that such a creature would be accused,
 
or even suspected, but on the strongest proofs    of guilt? Some old haggard beldame, with an ill name at any rate, might be wrongfully suspected; but Violet Murrey, good sooth! must have been where she should not have been, ere a tongue or a finger in the county would have wagged to her prejudice.
SHERIFF. That's what your wife says, I suppose.
BAILLIE. By my faith, Sheriff, it's what every body says; for it stands to reason.
RUTHERFORD. That it stands to folly, would be an apter cause for every body's saying it, my worthy Baillie.
BAILLIE. Grace be with us all! does a minister of the Gospel set his face against that for which there be plain texts of Scripture? And when cattle are drained dry, children possessed, storms raised, houses unroofed, noises in the air, and every one's heart beating with distrust and fear of his neighbour, —is this a time for us to stand still, and leave free scope for Satan and his imps to lord it over a sober and godly land? By my certes! I would carry faggots with my own hands to burn my nearest of kin, though her cheeks were like
 
roses, and her hair like threads of gold, if she were found, but for one night, joining in the    elrich revelry of a devil's conventicle. A distant trumpet heard. Ha! the judges so near the town already!
SHERIFF. Would they were further off! they come sooner than I reckoned for.
BAILLIE. Soon or late, we must go to meet them, as in duty bound.—You take precedence, Sheriff: I will follow you.
                                         Exeunt Sheriff and Baillie. RUTHERFORD alone. What is or is not in this mysterious matter, lies beyond human reason to decide. That I must swear to the truth of what I have seen, when questioned thereupon by authority, is my only clear point of discernment. Hard necessity! My heart, in despite of every proof, whispers to me she is innocent. A loud brawling and tumult heard without. What noise is this? —The senseless exasperated crowd besetting one of those miserable women who held orgies on the heath on that dreadful night.

 
Enter Mary Macmurren and Wilkin , in the custody of Constables, and surrounded by a crowd, who are casting dust at her, &c. The Constables endeavouring to keep them off. FIRST WOMAN. Deil's hag! she'll pay for her pastime now, I trow.
SECOND WOMAN. For a' the milk kye she has witched.
FIRST WOMAN. For a' the bonnie bairns she has blasted.
FIRST MAN. She girns like a brock at a terry-dog.
SECOND MAN. Score her aboon the breath, or she'll cast a    cantrup, and be out o' your han's in a twinkling.
MARY MACMURREN. What gars ye rage at me sae? I ne'er did nae harm to nane o'ye.
FIRST WOMAN. Hear till her! hear till her! how she lees!
FIRST MAN. And what for no? Leeing is the best o' their lear, that hae the deel for their dominie.
SECOND MAN. Ay, wicket witch; leeing's nought to her:
 
but we'll gie her something forbye words for an answer. Wha has gotten a jocteleg to score the wrinkled brow o'her?
THIRD MAN offering a knife. Here! here!
                                         The crowd rush furiously upon her, and are with difficulty kept off by the Constables. FIRST CONSTABLE. Stand back, I say, every mither's son o' ye, an' every faither's daughter to boot. If the woman be a witch winna she be burnt for 't, as ithers o' that calling hae been afore her? Isna that enough to content ye?
FIRST MAN. Ay, we'll soon see that ugly face, glowering through the smoke o' her benfire, like a howlet in the stour of an auld cowping barn.
SECOND MAN. An that piece o' young warlockry by her side, see how he glow'rs at us! Can tu squeek, imp? Trying to pinch Wilkin , who calls out.
WILKIN. O dull, o' dear! the're meddling wi' me.
FIRST CONSTABLE. Shame upon ye, shame upon ye a'! Ha' ye nae better way o' warring wi' the deel than tormenting    a poor idiot?

 
MARY MACMURREN. Shame upon ye! he's a poor fatherless idiot.
FIRST WOMAN. Fatherless, forsooth! He's a fiend-begotten imp I warrant ye, and should be sent to the dad he belongs to.
                                         Trumpet heard nearer. FIRST CONSTABLE. Red the way, I say, and gang out o' our gait, ilka saul and bouk o' ye! The judges are at han', and my prisoner maun be kary'd or they come, else they'll order ye a' to the tolbooth at a swoop.
                                         Exeunt Constables with Mary Macmurren and Wilkin , followed by some of the crowd, while others remain; the trumpet heard still nearer. FIRST MAN. What a braw thing it is to hear the trumpet sound sae nobly! There they come now; the judges, and the sheriff, and the baillies, and the deacons—a' the grand authorities o' the country.
FIRST WOMAN. Hegh saf' us, what a gurly carle that judge is on the left! nae witch that stan's before him wull escape, I trow, war' she as young and as bonny as the rose-buds in June.
YOUNG WOMAN. Hau'd your tongue, mither, that a body may
 
see them in peace. It's an awfu' thing but to look upon them here: the Lord help them that maun face them in condemnation!
FIRST WOMAN. Daft bairn! wull the Lord help witches, think'st tu?
Enter Judges in procession, followed by the Sheriff, Baillies, Gentlemen of the county, and Attendants, &c. &c. and passing diagonally across the Stage, exeunt. SCENE II. A poor, mean Room in a private house in Paisley. Enter Annabella , throwing back her hood and mantle as she enters. ANNABELLA. Now let me breathe awhile, and enjoy my hard-earned triumph unconstrainedly.—Revenge so complete, so swift-paced, so terrible! It repays me for all the misery I have endured. —May I triumph? dare I triumph?—Why am I astounded and terrified on the very pinnacle of exultation? Were she innocent, Providence
 
had protected her. What have I done but contrived the means for proving her guilt? Means which come but in aid of others that would almost have been sufficient.
Enter Black Bawldy . BAWLDY. O dool, O dool! she's condemned! she'll be executed, she'll be burnt, she'll be burnt the morn's morning at the cross, and a' through my putting that sorrowfu' gown into your hands, and by foul play, too, foul befa' it! O hone, O hone!
ANNABELLA. What's all this weeping and wringing of hands for? Art thou distracted?
BAWLDY. I kenna how I am, I care na how I am; but I winna gang to hell wi' the death of an innocent leddy on my head, for a' the gowd in Christentie.
ANNABELLA. Poor fool! what makes thee think that the gown thou gottest for me had any thing to do    with her condemnation?
BAWLDY. O you wicked woman! I ken weel enough; and I ken what for you confined me in that back
 
chammer sae lang, and keepet my brains in sic a whirlegig wi' whiskey and potations.
ANNABELLA. Thou knowest! how dost thou know?
BAWLDY. I set my lug to a hole in the casement, and heard folks below in the close telling a' about the trial. It was that gown spread out in the court, wi' a hole in the sleeve o't, matching precisely to a piece o' the same silk, which na doubt you tore out yoursel whan it was in your hands, that made baith judge and jury condemn her.
ANNABELLA. Poor simpleton! did'st thou not also hear them say, that the minister, sore against his will, swore he saw her on the moor, where the witches were dancing, in company with a man who has been in his grave these three years? was not that proof enough to condemn her, if there had been nothing more?
BAWLDY. It may be sae.
ANNABELLA. And is so. Is not Mary Macmurren a witch? and has not she been condemned upon much slighter evidence? Thou'rt an absolute fool, man, for making such disturbance about nothing.

 
BAWLDY.    Fool, or nae fool, I'll gang to the sheriff and tell him the truth, and then my conscience wull be clear frae her death, whate'er she may be.
ANNABELLA. Her death, frightened goose! Dost thou think she will really be executed?
BAWLDY. I heard them say, that she and Mary Macmurren are baith to be brunt the morn's morning.
ANNABELLA. They said what they knew nothing about. Mary Macmurren will be burnt, for an example to all other witches and warlocks, but a respite and pardon will be given to Violet Murrey: it is only her disgrace, not her death, that is intended; so thy conscience may be easy.
BAWLDY. If I could but believe you!
ANNABELLA. Believe me, and be quiet; it is the best thing thou canst do for thyself, and for those who are dearest to thee. Be a reasonable creature, then, and promise to me never to reveal what thou knowest.
BAWLDY. I will keep the secret, then, since she is not to
 
suffer. But winna you let me out the morn to see the burning o' Mary Macmurren? It wad be a vexatious thing to be sae near till't, and miss sic a sight as that.
ANNABELLA. Thou shalt have all reasonable indulgence.    But what scares thee so?
                                         Voice heard without. BAWLDY trembling. I hear the voice o' Grizeld Bane. She mun ha' been below the grund wi' her master sin' we last gat sight o' her at the tower, else the sheriff officers wad ha' grippet her wi' the rest.— Lord preserve us! is she coming in by the door or the winnoch, or up through the boards o' the flooring? I hear her elrich voice a' round about us, an my lugs ring like the bell o' an amos house.
Enter Grizeld Bane . GRIZELD BANE. Now, my brave lady, my bold lady, my victorious lady! Satan has many great queens in his court, many princesses in his court, many high-blooded beauties in his court; I saw them all last night, sweeping with their long velvet robes the burning pavement of it: thou wilt have no mean mates to keep thee company, and
 
thou wilt match with the best of them too; there is both wit and wickedness in thee to perfection.
ANNABELLA. Hush, hush, Grizeld Bane! What brings thee here? Is there not good ale and spirits in thy cellar, and a good bed to rest upon? What brings thee here?
GRIZELD BANE. Shame of my cellar! think'st thou I have been there all this time? I have been deeper, and    deeper, and deeper than a hundred cellars, every one sunken lower than another.
BAWLDY aside to Annabella . I tauld you sae, madam.
ANNABELLA aside to Bawldy . Go to thy chamber, if thou'rt afraid.
GRIZELD BANE. Ay, deeper and deeper—
ANNABELLA. Thou need'st not speak so loud, Grizeld Bane: I understand thee well enough. I hope thou hast been well received where thou wert.
GRIZELD BANE. Ay; they received me triumphantly. They scented the blood that will pour and the brands that will blaze; the groans and the shrieks that
 
will be uttered were sounding in their ears, like the stormy din of a war-pipe. What will be done to-morrow morning! Think upon that, my dainty chuck! and say if I did not deserve a noble reception.
ANNABELLA. No doubt, with such society as thy imagination holds converse with.
GRIZELD BANE. Yes, dearest! and thou, too, hast a noble reception abiding thee.
ANNABELLA shrinking back. Heaven forfend!
GRIZELD BANE. Ha, ha, ha! Art thou frighten'd, dearest? Do not be frightened! it is a grand place: my own mate is there, and the cord about his neck changed into a chain of rubies. There is much    high promotion abiding thee.
ANNABELLA. And will have long abiding, I trust, ere I am invested with it.
GRIZELD BANE. Not so long; not so long, lady: whenever thou wilt it may be. Dost thou love a clasp'd gorget for thy pretty white neck? Going up to her with a sly grin of affected courtesy, and attempting to grasp her throat.

 
BAWLDY springing forward and preventing her. Blasted witch! wad ye throttle her?
GRIZELD BANE. Ha! imp! hast thou followed me so fast behind? Down with thee! down with thee! There is molten lead and brimstone a-cooking for thy supper; there's no lack of hot porridge for thee, varlet.
BAWLDY. Oh madam, oh madam! what hae ye brought on yoursel and on me, that was but a poor ignorant callant! O send for the minister at once, and we'll down on our knees, and he'll pray for us. The damnation of the wicked is terrible.
ANNABELLA. She is but raving: the fumes of her posset have been working in her brain; be not foolish enough to be frightened at what she says.
BAWLDY. I wish, O I wish I had never done it! I wish I had never set eyes or set thoughts on the mammon of unrighteousness. Oh, oh!
GRIZELD BANE to Bawldy . Ha, ha, ha! Thou'rt frighten'd, art thou?
ANNABELLA.    Thou see'st she is in jest, and has pleasure in
 
scaring thee. Go to thy chamber, and compose thyself. Calling him back as he is about to go, and speaking in his ear. Don't go till she has left me. Hie to thy cellar, Grizeld Bane.
GRIZELD BANE. And leave thy sweet company, lady?
ANNABELLA. For a good savoury meal, which is ready for thee; I hear them carrying it thither. Go, go! I have promised to visit Lady Dungarren at a certain hour, and I must leave thee. Calling very loud. Landlord! Landlord! Enter Landlord a strong determined-looking man. Is Grizeld Bane's meal ready? Significantly.
LANDLORD. Yes, madam, and with as good brandy to relish it as either lord or lady could desire. To Grizeld Bane . Come, my lofty dame, let me lead you hence. Fixing his eyes stedfastly on her face, while she sullenly submits to be led off.
Manent Annabella and Bawldy . BAWLDY. The Lord be praised she is gone! for she has been in the black pit o' hell since yestreen, and
 
wad pu' every body after her an she could. Dear leddy, send for the minister.
ANNABELLA. Hold thy foolish tongue, and retire to thy chamber. Violet Murrey's life is safe enough, so thy conscience may be easy. Follow me, for I must lock thee in.
BAWLDY. Mun I still be a prisoner?
ANNABELLA.    Thou sha'n't be so long; have patience a little while, foolish boy.
                                         Exeunt. SCENE III. A Prison. Violet Murrey is discovered sitting on the ground, by the light of a lamp stuck in the wall; her face hid upon her lap, while a gentle rocking motion of the body shows that she is awake. Enter Dungarren by a low arched door, which is opened cautiously by a turnkey, who immediately shuts it again and disappears. DUNGARREN going close to her, and after a sorrowful pause. Violet, O Violet, my once dear Violet! dost
 
thou know my voice? Wilt thou not raise thy head and look upon me?
VIOLET. I know your voice: you are very kind to come to me in my misery.
DUNGARREN. Misery, indeed! Oh that I should see thee thus,—the extremity of human wretchedness closing around thee!
VIOLET rising from the ground and standing erect. Say not the extremity, Robert Kennedy, for I am innocent.
DUNGARREN. I will believe it. Ay, in despite of evidence as clear as the recognition of noon-day,—in despite of all evidence, I would believe it. The hateful sin of witchcraft, if such a sin there be, thou hast never committed; it is impossible.
VIOLET. I know thou wilt believe it: and O! that thou could'st also believe that I am innocent of all falsehood and fickleness of affection! But thou canst not do so; it were unreasonable to expect it. Thou wilt think of me as an ungrateful, deceitful creature; and this is the memory I must leave behind me with Robert of Dungarren.

 
DUNGARREN. I forgive thee! I forgive thee, dear Violet! for so in thy low estate I will call thee still,    though thou lovest another as thou hast never loved me.
VIOLET. I love him, full surely, as I cannot love thee, but not to the injury of that affection which has always been thine.
DUNGARREN. I came not here to upbraid: we will speak of this no more.
VIOLET. Alas, alas! I should speak and think of things far different, yet this lies on my heart as the heaviest load of all. May God forgive me for it!
DUNGARREN. And he will forgive thee, my dear friend! for such I may and will call thee, since I may not call thee more.
VIOLET. Do, my noble Robert! that is best of all. And, resting in thy mind as a friend, I know— I am confident, that something will happen, when I am gone, that will discover to thee my faithfulness. Death will soon be past, and thou wilt live to be a prosperous gentleman, and wilt
 
sometimes think of one—my evil fame will not—thou wilt think, ay, wilt speak good of Violet Murrey, when all besides speak evil. Thou wilt not— Bursts into tears.
DUNGARREN embracing her passionately. My dear, dear creature! dear as nothing else    has ever been to me, thou shalt not die: the very thought of it makes me distracted!
VIOLET. Be not so: it is the manner of it that distresses thee. But has it not been the death of the martyrs, of the holy and the just; of those, the dust of whose feet I had been unworthy to wipe? Think of this, and be assured, that I shall be strengthened to bear it.
DUNGARREN. Oh, oh, oh! If deliverance should be frustrated!
VIOLET. What art thou talking of? thou art, indeed, distracted. Nay, nay! let not my execution terrify thee so much. I, too, was terrified; but I have learnt from my gaoler, who has been present at such spectacles, that the sentence, though dreadful, is executed mercifully. The flames will not reach me till I have ceased to breathe; and many a natural disease doth end the course of life as mine will be terminated.

 
DUNGARREN. God forbid! God help and deliver us!
                                         Runs impatiently to a corner of the dungeon, and puts his ear close to the ground. I do not hear them yet: if they should fail to reach it in time, God help us!
VIOLET. What dost thou there? What dost thou listen for? What dost thou expect?
DUNGARREN. Means for thy deliverance,—thy escape.
VIOLET. Say not so; it is impossible.
DUNGARREN.    It is possible, and will be, if there's a Providence on earth—if there's mercy in heaven.
                                         Puts his ear to the ground as before. VIOLET stooping and listening. I hear nothing. What is it thou expectest to hear?
DUNGARREN. I do hear it now: they are near; they will open upon us presently.
VIOLET. What dost thou hear?
DUNGARREN. The sound of their spades and their mattocks.
 
O my brave miners! they will do their work nobly at last.
VIOLET. A way to escape under ground! my ears ring and my senses are confounded. Escape and deliverance?
DUNGARREN. Yes, love, and friend, and dear human creature! escape and deliverance are at hand.
VIOLET. How good and noble thou art to provide such deliverance for me, believing me unfaithful!
DUNGARREN. Come, come; that is nothing: be what thou wilt, if I can but save thee!—Life and death are now on the casting of a die.—The ground moves; it is life! Tossing up his arms exultingly.
VIOLET. The ground opens: wonderful, unlooked-for deliverance! Thank God! thank God! his mercy has sent it.
                                         The earthen floor of the dungeon at one corner falls in, making a small opening, and the miners are heard distinctly at work. DUNGARREN calling down to them. May we descend? are you ready?

 
VOICE beneath.    In two minutes the passage will be practicable.
DUNGARREN as before. Make no delay; we will pass any how.
VIOLET. How quickly they have worked, to mine so far under ground since yesterday!
DUNGARREN. That mine was completed many months ago to favour the escape of a prisoner, who died suddenly in prison before his projected rescue. The secret was revealed to me yesterday, by one of the miners, who had originally conducted the work.
VOICE beneath. We are ready now.
DUNGARREN. Heaven be praised! I will first descend, and receive thee in my arms.
                                         As they are about to descend, the door of the dungeon opens, and enter Rutherford and Lady Dungarren , accompanied by the Sheriff and Gaoler. SHERIFF. Ha! company admitted without due permission! Dungarren here! Your underling, Mr. Gaoler, is a rogue. How is this?

 
GAOLER. As I am a Christian man, I know no more about it than the child that was born since yestreen.
SHERIFF. It is only one born since yestreen that will believe thee. A hole in the floor, too, made for concealment and escape! Dungarren, you are my prisoner in the king's name. To favour the escape of a criminal is no slight offence against the laws of the land.
DUNGARREN.    You distract me with your formal authorities: the laws of the land and the laws of God are at variance, for she is innocent.
SHERIFF. She has abused and bewitched thee to think so; and a great proof it is of her guilt.
DUNGARREN. It is you and your coadjutors who are abused, dreadfully and wickedly abused, to hurry on, with such unrighteous obduracy, the destruction of one whom a savage would have spared. Tremble to think of it. At your peril do this.
SHERIFF. I am as sorry as any man to have such work
 
to do, but yet it must be done; and at your peril resist the law. Holloa, you without! Calling loud. Enter his Officers, armed. Take Robert Kennedy, of Dungarren, into custody, in the king's name.
                                         The Officers endeavour to lay hold of Dungarren , who paces about in a state of distraction. DUNGARREN. Witchcraft! heaven grant me patience! her life to be taken for witchcraft? senseless idiotical delusion!
SHERIFF to Officers. Do your duty, fellows: he is beside himself; distracted outright.
VIOLET. Noble Dungarren! submit to the will of heaven. I am appointed to my hard fate; and God will enable me to bear it. Leave me, my dear friend! be patient, and leave me.
DUNGARREN.    They shall hack me to pieces ere I leave thee.

 
VIOLET. Dear Robert, these are wild distracted words, and can be of no avail.—Good Mr. Rutherford, and Lady Dungarren, too; ye came here to comfort me: this I know was your errand, but O comfort him! speak to him, and move him to submission.
RUTHERFORD. Your present vain resistance, Dungarren, does injury to her whom you wish to preserve.
LADY DUNGARREN. My son, my Robert, thou art acting like a maniac. Retire with these men, who are only doing their duty, and neither wish to injure nor insult you. I will stay with Violet, and Mr. Rutherford will go with you.
DUNGARREN. Leave her, to see her no more!
LADY DUNGARREN. Not so; the sheriff will consent, that you may see her again in the morning, ere—
SHERIFF. I do consent: you shall see her in the morning, before she goes forth to—to the—to her—

 
DUNGARREN. To that which is so revolting and horrible, that no one dare utter it in words. Oh! oh, oh!
                                         Groans heavily, and leans his back to the wall, while his arms drop listlessly by his side, and the Officers, laying hold of him, lead him out in a state of faintness and apathy. RUTHERFORD. His mind is now exhausted, and unfit for present soothing; attempts to appease and console him must come hereafter; there is time enough    for that. To Violet , with tenderness. But thy time is short; I would prepare thee for an awful change. Unless thou be altogether hostile to thoughts of religion and grace, which I can never believe thee to be.
VIOLET. O no, no! that were a dreadful hostility; and thou, even thou, the good and enlightened Rutherford, my long-tried monitor and friend, can express a doubt whether I am so fearfully perverted. Alas! death is terrible when it comes with disgrace,—with the execration of Christian fellow-creatures! O pray to God for me! pray to God fervently, that I be not overwhelmed with despair.

 
RUTHERFORD. I will pray for thee most fervently; and thou wilt be supported.
VIOLET. I have been at times, since my condemnation, most wonderfully composed and resigned, as if I floated on a boundless ocean, beneath His eye who says, “Be calm, be still; it is my doing.” But, oh! returning surges soon swell on everyside, tossing, and raging, and yawning tremendously, like gulfs of perdition, so that my senses are utterly confounded. My soul has much need of thy ghostly comfort.
LADY DUNGARREN.    Comfort her, good Rutherford! I forgive her all that she has done against my poor child, and may God forgive her!
VIOLET. And will nothing, dear Madam, remove from your mind that miserable notion, that I have practised withcraft against the health and life of your child? Can you believe this and pity me? No, no! were I the fiend-possessed wretch you suppose me to be, a natural antipathy would rise in your breast at the sight of me, making all touch of sympathy impossible. I am innocent of this, and of all great crime; and you will know it, when I am laid in a dishonoured
 
grave, and have passed through the fearful pass of death, from which there is no return.
LADY DUNGARREN. You make me tremble, Violet Murrey: if you are innocent, who can be guilty?
VIOLET. Be it so deem'd! it is God's will: I must be meek when such words are uttered against me. After a pause. And you think it possible that I have practised with evil powers for the torment and destruction of your child; of poor Jessie, who was my little companion and play-fellow, whom I loved, and do love so truly; who hung    round my neck so kindly, and called me— ay, sister was a sweet word from her guileless lips, and seemed to be— Bursts into an agony of tears.
LADY DUNGARREN to Rutherford . She may well weep and wring her hands: it makes me weep to think of the power of the Evil One over poor unassisted nature. Had she been less gentle and lovely, he had tempted her less strongly. I would give the best part of all that I possess to make and to prove her innocent. But it cannot be; O no! it cannot be!
RUTHERFORD to Lady Dungarren . Forbear! forbear! Prayer and supplication
 
to the throne of mercy for that grace which can change all hearts, convert misery into happiness, and set humble chastised penitence by the side of undeviating virtue,—prayer and supplication for a poor stricken sister, and for our sinful selves, is our fittest employment now.
VIOLET. Thanks, my good Sir; you are worthy of your sacred charge. I am, indeed, a poor stricken sister; one of the flock given you to lead, and humbly penitent for all the sins and faults I have really committed. Pray for me, that I may be more perfectly penitent, and strengthened for the fearful trial that awaits me.
RUTHERFORD. Thou wilt be strengthened.
VIOLET.    O! I have great need! I am afraid of death; I am afraid of disgrace; I am afraid of my own sinking pusillanimous weakness.
RUTHERFORD. But thou need'st not be afraid, my dear child; trust in his Almighty protection, who strengthens the weak in the hour of need, and gives nothing to destruction which in penitence and love can put its trust in Him.

 
VIOLET weeping on his shoulder. I will strive to do it, my kind pastor; and the prayers of a good man will help me.
RUTHERFORD. Let us kneel, then, in humble faith.
SHERIFF advancing from the bottom of the Stage. Not here, good Sir; I cannot leave her here, even with a man of your cloth, and that opening for escape in the floor.
RUTHERFORD. As you please, Sir; remove her to another cell: or, if it must be, let a guard remain in this.
Enter an Attendant. ATTENDANT to Sheriff. It is ready, Sir.
SHERIFF to Violet . You must be removed to another prison-room.
VIOLET. As you please, Sheriff.
SHERIFF. Lean upon me, Madam: woe the day that I should lodge so fair a lady in such unseemly chambers!
VIOLET. I thank you for your courtesy, good Sheriff:
 
—you do what you deem to be your duty;    and when you are at last undeceived, and convinced of my innocence, as I know you will one day be, you will be glad to remember that you did it with courtesy.
SHERIFF. Blessing on thy lovely face, witch or no witch! dost thou speak to me so gently!
                                         Exit Violet , leaning on the Sheriff. Manet Gaoler, who mutters to himself as he prepares to follow them. GAOLER. A bonny witch, and a cunning ane, as ever signed compact wi' Satan! I wonder what cantrap she'll devise for the morn, whan the pinching time comes. I wish it were over.
                                         Exit, locking the door.
 
ACT V. SCENE I. A mean Chamber, with a window looking upon the Market-place of Paisley. Enter Annabella and the Landlord of the House. LANDLORD. Here, Madam, you can remain concealed from every body, and see the execution distinctly from the window.
ANNABELLA. Yes; this is what I want. And you must let no creature come here, on any account. Keep your promise upon this point, I charge you.
LANDLORD. Trust me, Madam, nobody shall enter this room, though they carried a bag of gold in their hand. I have refused a large sum for the use of that window; and excepting some schoolboys and apprentices who have climbed up to the roof of the house, there is not a creature in the tenement, but Grizeld Bane and Black Bawldy, each in their place of confinement.
ANNABELLA. I thank thee, Landlord, and will reward thee
 
well: thou shalt be no loser for the money thou hast refused on my account. What is the hour?
LANDLORD. The abbey church struck eight, as I reckon, half an hour ago.
ANNABELLA. Longer than that—much longer. The time should be close at hand for leading out the criminals. Going to the window. What a concourse of people are assembled! and such a deep silence through the whole!
LANDLORD.    Ay; in the day of doom they will scarcely stand closer and quieter.
ANNABELLA. Hold thy tongue: we know nothing of such matters.
LANDLORD. But what the holy book reveals to us.
ANNABELLA. Leave me, I pray thee. I would be alone. Landlord retires. Half an hour! no half hour was ever of such a length.—Landlord! ho! Landlord!
Re-enter Landlord. LANDLORD. What is your pleasure, Madam?

 
ANNABELLA. Art thou sure that no reprieve has arrived? It must be past the hour. Bell tolls. Ha! the time is true.
LANDLORD. That awful sound! It gives notice that the prisoners will soon be led forth. Lord have mercy on their sinful souls! on all sinful souls!
ANNABELLA. Thou may'st go: I would be alone.
                                         Exit Landlord.                                          Bell tolls again, and at intervals through the whole scene. ANNABELLA alone. Now comes the fearful consummation! Her arts, her allurements, her seeming beauty, her glamour, and her power,—what will they all amount to when the noon of this day shall be past? a few black ashes, and a few scorched bones.—Fye upon these cowardly thoughts,— this sinking confidence! Revenge is sweet; revenge is noble; revenge is natural; what price    is too dear for revenge?—Why this tormenting commotion? To procure false evidence for the conviction of one whom we know or believe to be guilty,—is this a sin past redemption? No; it is but the sacrifice of truth for right and useful ends. I know it is; reason says it is; and I will be firm and bold, in spite of human infirmity.

 
Enter Grizeld Bane . GRIZELD BANE. Yes, dearest; thou art very bold. There is not a cloven foot, nor a horned head of them all, wickeder and bolder than thou art.
ANNABELLA shrinking back. What brings thee here?
GRIZELD BANE. To be in such noble company.
ANNABELLA. What dost thou mean by that?
GRIZELD BANE. Every word hath its meaning, Lady, though every meaning hath not its word, as thou very well knowest. I am great; thou art great; but the greatest of all stands yonder. Pointing to the farther corner of the room.
ANNABELLA. What dost thou point at? I see nothing.
GRIZELD BANE. But thou wilt soon, dearest. The master we both serve is standing near us. His stature is lofty; his robe is princely; his eyes are two flames of fire. And one stands behind him, like a chieftain of elrich degree.—But why is he thus?
 
Can no power undo that hateful noose? It wavers before my eyes so distractingly!
ANNABELLA.    Thou art, indeed, distracted and visionary. There is nobody here but ourselves.
GRIZELD BANE. The master of us all is waiting yonder; and he will not sink to his nether court again till the fair lady is with him.
ANNABELLA. O! I understand thy moody fancy now. The master thou meanest is waiting for Violet Murrey.
GRIZELD BANE. Yes, dearest, if he can get her. If not, he will have some one else, who is worthy to bear him company. He must have his meed and his mate: he will not return empty-handed, when a fair lady is to be had.
ANNABELLA. Heaven forfend! The bell now sounds quicker. That bell sounds differently: they are now leading them forth.
GRIZELD BANE running to the window, and beckoning her. Come, come here, darling: here is a sight to
 
make the eyes flash, and the heart's blood stir in its core. Here is a brave sight for thee!
                                         They both go to the window, and the Scene closes. SCENE II. The Market-place prepared for the Execution, with two Stakes, and faggots heaped round them, erected in the middle, but nearer the bottom than the front of the Stage. A great Crowd of people are discovered. The Bell tolls rapidly, and then stops. Enter the Sheriff and Magistrates, and Mary Macmurren , supported by a Clergyman, and guarded. CLERGYMAN. Now, prisoner, may God be merciful to thee! Make use of the few moments of life that remain, by making confession before these good people of the wickedness thou hast committed, and the justice of the sentence that condemns thee. It is all the reparation now in thy power; and may God accept it of thee!
MARY MACMURREN. Oh, hone! oh, hone!

 
CLERGYMAN. Dost thou not understand what I say? Make confession.
MARY MACMURREN. Oh, hone! oh, hone!
CLERGYMAN. Dost thou hear me, woman? Make confession.
MARY MACMURREN. Confession?
CLERGYMAN. Yes, confession, woman.
MARY MACMURREN. Tell me what it is, an' I'll say't.
BAILLIE. How cunning she is to the last!
CLERGYMAN to Mary Macmurren . Didst thou not confess on thy trial that thou wert a witch, and hadst tryste-meetings and dealings with the devil?
MARY MACMURREN. Lord hae mercy on me: I said what I thought, and I thought as ye bade me. The Lord hae mercy on a wicked woman! for that, I know, I am.
BAILLIE. How cunning she is again! She calls herself    wicked, but will not call herself witch.

 
CLERGYMAN. Mary Macmurren, make confession ere you die, and God will be more merciful to you.
MARY MACMURREN. Oh, hone! oh, hone! miserable wretch that I am! Do ye mak confession for me, Sir, and I'll say't after you, as weel as I dow. Oh, hone! oh, hone!
SHERIFF to Clergyman. There is no making any thing of her now, miserable wretch! Lead her on to the stake, and make her pray with you there, if the Evil One hath not got the entire mastery over her to the very last. The Clergyman leads Mary Macmurren to the stake. And now there is a sadder duty to perform; the fair, the young, and the gentle must be brought forth to shame and to punishment.
                                         He goes to the gate of the prison, and returns, conducting Violet Murrey , who enters, leaning on the arm of Rutherford . SHERIFF. Now, Madam, it is time that I should receive from you any commands you may wish to entrust me with: they shall be faithfully obeyed.
VIOLET. I thank you, Mr. Sheriff. What may be allowed
 
for mitigating my sufferings, I know you have already ordered: have you also given similar directions in behalf of my miserable companion?
SHERIFF. I have, Madam.
VIOLET. Thanks for your mercy! My passage to a    better state will be short: and of God's mercy there I have no misgivings; for of the crime laid to my charge I am as innocent as the child newly born; as you yourself, worthy Sir, or this good man on whose arm I now lean.
SHERIFF. If this be so, Lady, woe to the witnesses, the judges, and the jury by whom you are condemned!
VIOLET. Say not so. I am condemned by what honest, though erring men, believed to be the truth. What God alone knows to be the truth, is not for man's direction.— To Rutherford . Weep not for me, my kind friend. You had good cause to believe that you had seen me in company with a creature not of this world, and you were compelled to declare it.
RUTHERFORD. I wish I had died, ere that evidence had been given!

 
VIOLET. Be comforted! be comforted! for you make me good amends, in that your heart refuses, in spite of such belief, to think me guilty of the crime for which I am to suffer. There is another— you know whom I mean—who thinks me innocent. When I am gone, ye will be often together, and speak and think of Violet Murrey. This is the memory I shall leave behind me: my evil    fame with others is of little moment. And yet I needs must weep to think of it; 't is human weakness.
RUTHERFORD. God bless and strengthen thee, my daughter, in this thy last extremity!
VIOLET. Fear not for that: I am strengthened. You have prayed for me fervently, and I have prayed for myself; and think ye I shall not be supported? Looking round on the crowd. And these good people, too, some of them, I trust, will pray for me. They will one day know that I am innocent.
SEVERAL VOICES from the crowd, calling out in succession. We know it already.—She must be so.—She is innocent.

 
BAILLIE. I command silence!—Mr. Sheriff, your duty calls upon you.
SHERIFF to Violet . Madam. Turns away.
VIOLET. You speak, and turn from me: I understand you.
SHERIFF. I am compelled to say, though most unwillingly, our time is run.
VIOLET. And I am ready.— Turning to Rutherford . The last fearful step of my unhappy course only remains: you have gone far enough, my good Sir. Receive my dying thanks for all your kindness,    and let us part. Farewell! till we meet in a better world!
RUTHERFORD. Nay, nay; I will be with thee till all is over, cost what it may,—though it should kill me.
VIOLET. Most generous man! thou art as a parent to me, and, woe the day! thy heart will be wrung as though thou wert so in truth.
BAILLIE to Sheriff. Why so dilatory? Proceed to the place of execution.

 
SHERIFF. Not so hasty, Sir! The psalm must first be sung.
BAILLIE. It will be sung when she is at the stake.
SHERIFF aside. Would thou wert there in her stead, heartless bigot!— Aloud. Raise the psalm here.
VIOLET. You are very humane, good Sheriff, but we shall, if you please, proceed to the place appointed.
                                         She is led towards the stake, when a loud cry is heard without. VOICE. Stop! stop! stop the execution.
Enter Murrey , darting through the crowd, who give way to let him pass. MURREY. She is innocent! she is innocent! Ye shall not murder the innocent!
SHERIFF to Murrey . Who art thou, who wouldst stop the completion of the law?
MURREY. One whom you have known; whom you have looked on often.

 
SHERIFF. The holy faith preserve us! art thou a living man?
RUTHERFORD.    Murrey of Torwood! doth the grave give up its dead, when the sun is shining in the sky?
SHERIFF. Look to the lady, she is in a swoon.
MURREY supporting Violet . My dear, my noble child! thine own misery thou couldst sustain, but mine has overwhelmed thee: dear, dear child!
Enter Dungarren , running distractedly. BAILLIE fronting him. Dungarren broke from prison, in defiance of the law!
DUNGARREN. In defiance of all earthly things. Pushing the Baillie aside, and rushing on to Violet . Who art thou? Looking sternly at Murrey . What right hast thou to support Violet Murrey?
MURREY. The right of a father; a miserable father.
DUNGARREN. Her father is dead.

 
MURREY. Not so, Dungarren: I would I were dead, if it could save her life.
DUNGARREN pointing to Rutherford . This good man, whose word is truth itself, laid Murrey of Torwood in the grave with his own hands.
MURREY. Did he examine the face of the corse which he so piously interred? I had changed clothes with my faithful servant.—But it is a story tedious to tell; and can ye doubt his claims to identity, who, in the very act of making them, subjects his own life to the forfeit of the law?
BAILLIE aside to the Sheriff's officers. By my faith! he is a condemned murderer,    and will be required of our hands; keep well on the watch, that he may not escape.
DUNGARREN. She seems to revive; she will soon recover. To Murrey . And it was you who were with her on the heath, and in the cave?
MURREY. It was I, Dungarren.
DUNGARREN. No apparition, no clandestine lover, but her own father!

 
VIOLET recovering, and much alarmed. Call him not father! I own him not! Send him away, send him away, dear Robert!
MURREY embracing her. My generous child! the strength of thy affection is wonderful, but it is all vain: I here submit myself willingly to the authority of the law, though innocent of the crime for which I am condemned—the wilful murder of a worthy gentleman. And now, Mr. Sheriff, you cannot refuse to reprieve her, who is mainly convicted for that, in being seen with me, she seemed to hold intercourse with apparitions, or beings of another world.
SHERIFF. You speak reason: God be praised for it!
DUNGARREN. God be praised, she is safe!
BAILLIE. There be other proofs against her besides that.
DUNGARREN. Be they what they may, they are false!
Enter Black Bawldy , letting himself down from the wall of a low building, and running eagerly to the Sheriff. BAWLDY. Hear, my Lord Sheriff,—hear me, your honour
 
   —hear me, Dungarren;—hear me, a' present! She's innocent;—I stole it, I stole it mysel: the Lady Annabel tempted me, and I stole it.
SHERIFF. Simple fool! it is not for theft she is condemned.
BAWLDY. I ken that weel, your honour. She's condemned for being a witch, and she's nae witch: I stole it mysel and gied it to the Lady Annabel, wha cuttet the hole i' the sleeve o't, I'll be sworn. Little did I think what wicked purpose she was after.
SHERIFF. Yes, yes, my callant! I comprehend thee now: it is that gown which was produced in Court, thou art talking of. Thou stole it for the Lady Annabel, and she cut a piece out of it, which she pretended to have found in the sick-chamber?
BAWLDY. E'en sae, your honour. Whip me, banish me, or hang me, an' it man be sae, but let the innocent leddy abee.
SHERIFF. Well, well; I'll take the punishing of thee into my own hands, knave. What shrieks are these? Repeated shrieks are heard from the window of a house, and two figures are seen indistinctly
 
within, struggling: a dull stifled sound succeeds, and then a sudden silence. There is mischief going on in that house.
BAILLIE running to the door of the house, and knocking. Let me enter: I charge you within, whoever ye be, to open the door. No answer! Knocks again.    Still no answer! Open the door, or it shall be forced open.
GRIZELD BANE looking over the window. Ha, ha! what want ye, good Mr. Magistrate?
BAILLIE. Some body has suffered violence in this house; open the door immediately.
GRIZELD BANE. And what would you have from the house that ye are so impatient to enter? There be corses enow in the churchyard, I trow; ye need not come here for them.
SHERIFF. She is a mad woman, and has murdered somebody.
FIRST OFFICER. Mad, your honour! she's the witch we ha' been seeking in vain to apprehend, and the blackest, chiefest hag o' them a'.

 
SECOND OFFICER. By my faith, we mun deal cannily wi' her, or she'll mak her escape fra' us again through the air.
BAILLIE calling up to her. Open the door, woman, and you sha'n't be forced; we want to enter peaceably. Who is with you, there? Who was it that shrieked so fearfully?
GRIZELD BANE. Never trouble thy head about that, Mr. Magistrate; she'll never disturb you more.
SHERIFF. Who is it you have with you?
GRIZELD BANE throwing down to them the scarf of Annabella . Know ye that token? It was a fair lady who owned it, but she has no need of it now: hand    me up a winding sheet.
SHERIFF. The cursed hag has destroyed some lady.— Officers, enter by force, and do your duty. Witch or no witch, she cannot injure strong men like you, in the open light of day.
                                         The door is burst open, and the Officers go into the house, and presently re-enter, bearing the dead body of Annabella , which they place on the front of the Stage, the crowd gathering round to stare at it.
 
BAILLIE. Stand back, every one of you, and leave clear room round the body. It is the Lady Annabella. She has been strangled:—she has struggled fearfully; her features are swollen, and her eyes starting from her head; she has struggled fearfully.—Stand back, I say; retire to your places, every one of you, or I'll deal with you as breakers of the peace.
SHERIFF. Be not so angry with them, good Baillie: they must have some frightful sight to stare at, and they will be disappointed of that which they came for.
BAILLIE. Disappointed, sheriff! You do not mean, I hope, to reprieve that foul witch at the other stake: is not one execution enough for them? It makes me sick to see such blood-thirsting in a Christian land.
SHERIFF. Ay, you say true; that poor wretch had gone out of my head.
BAILLIE. Wretch enough, good sooth! the blackest    witch in Renfrewshire, Grizeld Bane excepted.

 
SHERIFF. But we need not burn her now: her evidence may be wanted to convict the other.
BAILLIE. Not a whit! we have evidence at command to burn her twenty times over. A bird in hand is a wise proverb. If we spare her now, she may be in Norway or Lapland when we want her again for the stake.
DUNGARREN approaching the body of Annabella . And this is thy fearful end, most miserable woman! It wrings my heart to think of what thou wert, and what thou mightst have been.
MURREY to Sheriff. Your authority having, on these undoubted proofs of her innocence, reprieved her, may I request that she be now withdrawn from the public gaze? It is not fit that she should be further exposed.
SHERIFF. True, Torwood; you shall lead her back to prison, where she shall only remain till safe and commodious apartments are prepared for her. As for yourself, I am sorry to say, we have no power to lodge you otherwise than as a condemned man, obnoxious to the last punishment of the law.

 
VIOLET. O say not so, dear Sir! He had made his escape, he was safe, he was free, and he surrendered    himself into your hands to save the life of his child. Will ye take advantage of that? it were cruel and ungenerous.
SHERIFF. We act, lady, under authority, and must not be guided by private opinions and affections.
BAILLIE. Most assuredly! it is our duty to obey the law and to make it be obeyed, without fear or favour.
VIOLET. On my knees, I beseech you! Kneeling and catching hold of the Baillie and Sheriff. I beseech you for an innocent man! Royal mercy may be obtained if ye will grant the time—time to save the life of the innocent—innocent, I mean, of intentional murder.
SHERIFF. Has he further proof of such innocence to produce than was shown on his trial?
BAILLIE. If he has not, all application for mercy were vain. He slew the man with whom he had a quarrel, without witnesses. If he is innocent, it
 
is to God and his own conscience, but the law must deem him guilty.
VIOLET. He did it not without witnesses, but he who was present is dead. Alas, alas! if Fatheringham had been alive, he had been justified.
BAILLIE. Forbear to urge that plea, lady: that the    only person who was present at the quarrel or combat is dead or disappeared, throws a greater shade of darkness on the transaction.
SHERIFF. These are hard words, Baillie, and unnecessary.
BAILLIE. You may think so, Sheriff, but if you yield on this point, I entirely dissent from it; ay, from granting any delay to the execution of his sentence. Shall a man be made gainer for having defied the law and broken from his prison?
SHERIFF to Murrey sorrowfully. I am afraid we can do nothing for you. You must prepare for the worst.
MURREY. I came here so prepared, worthy Sir: I knew you could do nothing for me. To Violet , who again kneels imploringly. Forbear, dearest
 
child! thou humblest thyself in vain. I will meet fate as a man: do not add to my suffering by giving way to such frantic humiliation. Raising her from the ground. Dungarren, I commit her to your protection. You will be her honourable friend.
DUNGARREN. Ay, and her devoted husband, also, if you esteem me worthy to be so.
MURREY. Worthy to be her husband, were she the daughter of a king, my noble Robert Kennedy. But thou must not be the son-in-law of such a    one as I am,—one whose life has been terminated by—
DUNGARREN. I despise the prejudice!
VIOLET. But I do not! O! I cannot despise it! If my father must suffer, I will never marry thee, and I will never marry another.—My fate is sealed. Thou and this good man pointing to Rutherford  will be my friends, and Heaven will, in pity, make my earthly course a short one. A creature so stricken with sorrow and disgrace has nothing to do in this world but to wait, in humble patience, till God in his mercy takes her out of it.

 
MURREY. Come from this hateful spot, my sweet child! Cruel as our lot is, we shall be, for what remains of this day, together.
                                         Endeavours to lead her out, but is prevented by the crowd, who gather close on the front of the Stage, as Grizeld Bane issues with frantic gestures from the house. VOICES from the crowd in succession. Ay, there she comes, and the deel raging within her.—The blackest witch of a'.—Let her be brunt at the stake that was meant for the leddy. —Hurra! hurra! mair faggots and a fiercer fire for Grizeld!—Hurra! and defiance to Satan and his agents!
A trumpet sounds without, and the tumult increases, till a company of Soldiers appears under arms, and enter an Officer, accompanied by Fatheringham . OFFICER giving a paper to the Sheriff. You will please, Mr. Sheriff, to make the contents of this paper public.
SHERIFF. I charge every one here, at his peril, to be    silent. Reading.
“Be it known unto all men, that the King's Majesty, with the Lords and Commons in Parliament
 
assembled, have decreed that the law punishing what has been called the crime of witchcraft as a felonious offence be repealed; and it is therefore repealed accordingly. Henceforth there shall no person be prosecuted at law as a wizard or witch, throughout these realms; and any person or persons who shall offer injury to any one, as being guilty of the supposed crime of witchcraft, shall be punished for such aggression. God save the King!”
                                         A pause of dead silence, followed by low, then loud murmurs, and then voices call out in succession. VOICES. My certes! the dee has been better represented in the house of Parliament than a' the braid shires in the kingdom.—Sic a decree as that in a Christian land!—To mak Satan triumphant!—There'll be fine gambols on moors and in kirkyards for this, I trow.—Parliament, forsooth! we hae sent bonnie members there, indeed, gin thae be the laws they mak.— And will Mary Macmurren escape after a'?— Out upon't! She may be brunt at ony rate, for she is condemned by the gude auld law of our forefathers.—Ay, so she may; that stands to    reason.
                                         Crowd close round the stake where Mary Macmurren is bound.
 
SHERIFF to the Crowd. Desist, I say, or the soldiers shall disperse you forthwith.
FATHERINGHAM. Would they burn the miserable creature for an imaginary crime; one may say, for a pastime!
BAILLIE to Fatheringham . No, good Sir; not imaginary. She is a witch by her own confession. And that woman pointing to Grizeld Bane  is also, by her own words, convicted of consorting and colleaguing with Satan,—an awful and mischievous witch.
FATHERINGHAM. Is she so?
GRIZELD BANE looking at him fiercely. Who says otherwise? The sun shines now, and that makes thee bold; but my time of power is coming.
FATHERINGHAM approaching her. Is this you, Grizeld Bane? What brought you to this part of the country?
GRIZELD BANE. The prince of the power of the air.
BAILLIE. There, Sir! you hear her confess it. And who is she? for you seem to know her.
FATHERINGHAM. A miserable woman whose husband was hanged
 
for murder, at Inverness, some years ago, and who thereupon became distracted. She was, when I left that country, kept in close custody. But she has, no doubt, escaped from her keepers, who may not be very anxious to reclaim    her.
BAILLIE. We must secure her, then, and send her back to the north.
GRIZELD BANE. Lay hands on me who dare! I defy you: my master is stronger than you all, since you sent him to his kingdom of darkness. Ye cannot stop the breath of a spirit, though you had a score of executioners at your beck. Lay hands upon me who dare!
FATHERINGHAM. Nobody will do you any violence, Dame; but you will quietly retire with these two friends of yours motioning significantly to two Soldiers, who advance and take charge of her. Nay; make no resistance: look steadfastly in my face, and you will plainly perceive that you must go.
                                         Fixes his eyes upon her sternly, while she suffers herself to be led off. OFFICER. Now, Mr. Sheriff, release your prisoners, since the laws against witchcraft are abrogated.

 
SHERIFF. I do it most gladly. Would you had authority to command the release of all my prisoners.
OFFICER. It is only those condemned for witchcraft, whose enlargement I have authority to command.
MURREY stepping sternly from the opposite side of the Stage, and fronting Fatheringham closely. But there is a prisoner condemned for murder whom thou, James Fatheringham, knowest to be innocent, and therefore thou art by nature authorised, yea, compelled, to demand his release,    —I mean, the reversion of his sentence.
FATHERINGHAM starting back. Murrey of Torwood in the land of the living!
MURREY. No thanks to thee that I am so! To desert me, and leave the country too, circumstanced as thou knewest me to be,—the only witness of that fatal quarrel,—was it the act of a friend, of a Christian, of a man?
FATHERINGHAM. No, neither of a Christian, nor a heathen, had it been a voluntary act. But you were not yet in custody, when I left the country, with no intention of going further than the southern coast of Ireland, to visit a dying relation.

 
MURREY. In Ireland all these years?
FATHERINGHAM. Be not so hasty. That coast I never reached: a violent storm drove our vessel out to sea, where she was boarded and captured by a pirate. My varied tale, dear Murrey, you shall hear on a fitter occasion. Thank God that I am now here! and have this day accompanied my friend pointing to the Officer on his public errand, still in time to save thee. For hearing, on my return to England, some weeks ago, thy sad story, how thou hadst been condemned, hadst made thy escape from prison, how thy dead body was found in a pit, and interred,—I was in no hurry to proceed    northwards, as the justification of thy memory could not be disappointed.
MURREY. Thou shouldst not have suffered even my memory to rest under such imputation,—no, not an hour.
VIOLET. Dear father, be not so stern when deliverance, —a blessed deliverance,—is sent to thee. See; there is a tear in his eye. It was not want of friendship that detained him.
FATHERINGHAM. I thank thee, sweet lady, for taking my part.
 
It was not want of friendship that detained me; though Murrey has always been so hasty and ardent, and I so deliberate and procrastinating, it is wonderful we should ever have been friends.
DUNGARREN. No, not wonderful: though slow yourself, you loved him, perhaps, for his ardour.
FATHERINGHAM. Yes, young man, you are right. But how was it that he loved me? if, indeed, he ever loved me. Perhaps he never did.
MURREY rushing into his arms. I did—I do—and will ever love thee, wert thou as slow and inert as a beetle.
DUNGARREN. Now ye are friends, and this terrible tempest has past over us! May such scenes as we have this day witnessed never again disgrace a free and a Christian land!
                                         A murmur amongst the Crowd. SHERIFF.    Good people, be pacified; and instead of the burning of a witch, ye shall have six hogsheads of ale set abroach at the cross, to drink the health of Violet Murrey, and a grand funeral into the bargain.

 
DUNGARREN. Forbear, Sheriff: the body of this unhappy lady is no subject for pageantry. She shall be interred with decent privacy; and those who have felt the tyranny of uncontrolled passions will think, with conscious awe, of her end.
                                         The Curtain drops. Back matter THE TRAGEDY ON WITCHCRAFT The subject of this drama was first suggested to me by reading that very curious and original scene in the “Bride of Lammermuir,” when the old women, after the division of largess given at a funeral, are so dissatisfied with their share of it, and wonder that the devil, who helps other wicked people willing to serve him, has never bestowed any power or benefits upon them. It appeared to me that the gifted author had come within one step of accounting for a very extraordinary circumstance, frequently recorded in trials for the crime of witchcraft, —the accused themselves acknowledging the crime, and their having had actual intercourse with Satan and other wicked spirits. This was a confession that was sure to be followed by a cruel death, and the conjectures produced to account for it have never been satisfactory. It has been supposed that, previously to their trial, from cruel treatment and misery of every kind, they desired to have an end put to their wretched existence, even at the stake. But this is surely not very probable; for, if a fair trial by unprejudiced judges acquitted them of the crime, —a circumstance not likely to happen, —it was still in their power to get rid of life in the first river or pond deep enough to drown them, or by some other means less dreadful than fire and faggot. Neither can it be supposed that such confessions, at least all of them, were made in a state of delirium. It is more reasonable to suppose that some of those unhappy creatures, from the state of their minds, and from real circumstances leading to it, actually did believe themselves to have had intercourse with the Evil One, consequently to be witches; and the design of the play is to illustrate this curious condition of nature. Soon after the publication of that powerful and pathetic novel, I mentioned my thoughts upon the subject to Sir W. Scott, and urged him to pursue the new path he had just entered into. That I was unsuccessful in my suit, and failed to persuade him to undertake the subject, all his warm admirers — and who are not? — must regret, — a regret that will not be diminished by the perusal of the Tragedy on Witchcraft. The language made use of, both as regards the lower and higher characters, is pretty nearly that which prevailed in the West of Scotland about the period assigned to the event, or at least soon after it; and that the principal witch spoke differently from the other two, is rendered probable from her being a stranger, and her rank in life unknown. Even in those days the well-educated classes were distinguished from their neighbours on the south side of the Tweed, by their accent and pronunciation, rather than any actual difference of words.
The story is entirely imaginary, one circumstance excepted, viz. the piece rent from the gown of the supposed witch, produced in court as a proof that she had actually been present, though invisible, in the chamber of the tormented patient, — a real circumstance, mentioned, I believe, in one of the trials for witchcraft, though I forget where.
NOTES

ANDERSON
ANDERSON, DONALD, AND FIRST SERVANT
ANNABELLA
ATTENDANT
BAILLIE
BAWLDRY
BAWLDY
CLERGYMAN
DONALD
DUNGARREN
ELSPY LOW
ELSPY LOWE
FATHERINGHAM
FIRST CONSTABLE
FIRST MAN
FIRST OFFICER
FIRST SERVANT
FIRST VOICE
FIRST WOMAN
GAOLER
GRIZELD BANE
GRIZELD BANE, MARY MACMURREN, AND ELSPY LOW
LADY DUNGARREN
LADY DUNGARREN AND ANNABELLA
LANDLORD
MARY MACMURREN
MARY MACMURREN AND ELSPY LOW
MURREY
NURSE
OFFICER
PHEMY
PHEMY, NURSE, AND MAID-SERVANT
RUTHERFORD
SECOND MAN
SECOND OFFICER
SECOND VOICE
SECOND WOMAN
SEVERAL VOICES
SHERIFF
THIRD MAN
VIOLET
VOICE
VOICES
WILKIN
YOUNG WOMAN


Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions



?


