____________________________________________________________

The country inn (1804)

Author: Baillie, Joanna

Publication info: Miscellaneous Plays, By Joanna Baillie . [xix], 438 p. London: Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees [etc.], 1804.

http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/country-inn-1804/docview/2138579485/se-2?accountid=14270

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://temple-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/openurl/01TULI/TULI??url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;genre=book&amp;sid=ProQ:ProQ%3Aed&amp;atitle=&amp;title=The+country+inn+%281804%29&amp;issn=&amp;date=1804-01-01&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;spage=139&amp;au=Baillie%2C+Joanna&amp;isbn=&amp;jtitle=&amp;btitle=The+country+inn+%281804%29&amp;rft_id=info:eric/D0100056&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: THE COUNTRY INN: A COMEDY.
[Page ]
Front matter 1 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN: Sir John Hazelwood.
Worshipton , nephew to Sir John.
Amaryllis , a poet.
David , servant, &c. of the inn.
Will , postboy of the inn.
Jenkins , servant to Worshipton.
Piper, Fiddler, &c.
WOMEN: Lady Goodbody.
Miss Martin , niece to Lady Goodbody.
Miss Hannah Clodpate , niece to Lady Goodbody.
Dolly , maid of the inn.
Landlady.
Hopkins , Lady Goodbody's maid.
Sally.
Scene ,—A Country Inn, on one of the cross-roads leading from the North of England to London.
[Page 139]
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. The kitchen of a Country Inn: David and Jenkins discovered sitting by the fire-side. DAVID. John Thomson , says I, why do you put yourself into a passion? an angry man, says I, John, may be compared to three things.
JENKINS. Yaw! yaw! (yawning very wide) how thick that snow falls! (looking to the window.)
DAVID. Well, well! let it fall as thick as it pleases!—To three things, John. In the first place, in respect that he is very hot and very restless and all that, he may be compared to the boiling of a pot—no, no! that was the third thing.
Jenkins. Never mind, man, put it first this time for a variety.

[Page 140]
DAVID. No, no! let us have every thing as it should be. In the first place then, says I, in respect that he is so sharp, and so fussy, and so bouncing, he may be compared to your poor bottled small-beer: and in the second place, in respect that he is so loud and violent, and so hasty, he may be compared—
JENKINS. Yaw! yaw! yaw! (yawning again very loud.)
DAVID (very impatiently). Tut, man! can't you keep those jaws of yours together, and hear what a body says?
JENKINS. Yaw, yaw! Dont think because I yawn, David, that I don't hear what you say.—But go on with your story: in the second place—
DAVID. [25]   In the second place, says I, in respect that he is so violent and so loud, and so hasty, he may be compared to the letting off of a—
JENKINS. Of a train of gun-powder.
DAVID. No, sir; it was not to that, sir.

[Page 141]
JENKINS. To the letting off of what, then?
DAVID. No matter what: I had a comparison of my own, but I'll keep it to myself.
JENKINS. Very well, David; just as you please; for I can see now what an angry man is like, without your giving yourself any further trouble.
DAVID. Ay, ay! jeer away sir! you are just like your poor silly affected master up stairs, who simpers whenever I open my mouth to speak, as if nobody had any sense but himself.
JENKINS. I don't think that my master sets up for a wise man neither, master David; but he's young and well made, and—
DAVID. He well made, hang him! his uncle is a better made man by half.—Ay, there is a gentleman for ye! a reasonable, sensible, mannerly gentleman! he don't break in upon one with his sneers and his jeers when a body is talking soberly and sensibly.

[Page 142]
JENKINS. To be sure he has rather more manners about him than we can pretend to.
DAVID. [50]   By my faith he has! and more sense too. What do you think he said to me the other day? David, says he, you only want a great wig upon your head and a gown upon your shoulders, to make as good a proser as many that we listen to in the pulpit or the bench. Now, wan't it very condescending in him to call such a poor unlearned man as me a proser, along with such great folks as these? Not that I regarded so much the compliment to myself, for God knows, it becometh not a mortal man to be proud, but I love to hear people speak rationally and civilly.
JENKINS. Yes, there is nothing like it to be sure: but my young master is a very good master to me, and he spends his money like a gentleman.
DAVID. I don't care a rush how he spends his money: they seem to be the greatest gentlemen now-a-days, who have least money to spend. But if you had fallen sick on the road, like that poor old devil in the rose chamber, would your master have stopp'd so long at a poor Country Inn, to attend you himself
[Page 143]
like a sick nurse? I trow not! he would have scamper'd off, and left you to follow when you could, or to die, if you had a mind to it.
JENKINS. If I were old and sickly, indeed, I had as lief have [75]   Sir John for my master.
DAVID. I believe so: he is a better man than that skipjack nephew of his, twenty times over, and a better looking man too. I wonder much how he has come to this time o' th' day (for he must be near forty I guess) without taking a wife.
JENKINS. He thinks himself happier, I suppose, without one. And I am sure no lady of any spirit or fashion would think herself happy with him.
DAVID. How so? what kind of man is he at home on his own estate?
JENKINS. Why half ploughman; for he often enough holds his own plough of a morning, and can cast ye up as straight a furrow as any clod-footed lout in the country; half priest, for he reads family prayers to his servants every Sunday evening as devoutly as the vicar of the parish; half lawyer, for there is never a poor silly idiot that allows himself to be cheated
[Page 144]
in the neighbourhood who does not run to him about it directly, and he will brow-beat and out-wit half a dozen of attorneys to have the goose righted again, if it were but of a crown's value.
DAVID. Well, but there is nothing amiss in all this.
JENKINS. Then his other odd ways. Dinner must be upon the table every day at the very moment he has fixed, [100]   and he will not give ten minutes law to the first lord of the land. Devilishly inconvenient that for young fellows like me and my master.
DAVID. So much the better; I commend him for it.
JENKINS. Then he pretends to be hospitable, and entertains the first people of the country, and yet he is not ashamed to boast that there has not been a drunk man in his house since he was master of it.
DAVID. Nay, odds life! that is being too particular, indeed.
JENKINS. Ay, to be sure; and yet he puts always such an easy good humoured face upon it, that people will
[Page 145]
not call him a hunks for all that. One half of it I'm sure would have made any other man pass for a very curmudgeon. What has such a man to do with a wife, unless he could get some sober young lady, educated two hundred years ago, who has kept herself young and fresh all the while in some cave under ground along with the seven sleepers, to start up to his hand and say, “pray have me?”—As for my master, he would remain a bachelor if he could; but we young fellows who have only our persons for our patrimony, must dispose of them in their prime, when they will fetch the highest price.
DAVID. To be sure, to be sure! Princesses a piece for you! [125]   young men, now a days, are mightily puffed up in their own conceits. They are colts without a bridle, but they bite upon the bit at last. They are butterflies in the sun, but a rainy day washes the colour off their wings. They sail down the stream very briskly, but it carries them over the ca-cartica—cataract (what ye call a water-fall ye know) at last.
JENKINS. Faith, David! you string up so many what do ye call 'em similitudes in your discourse, there is no understanding it: you are just like that there poet in the green chamber, that writes upon the windows.
DAVID. He, drivling fellow! he has not sense enough to
[Page 146]
make a similitude. If it were not for the words he contrives to make clink with one another at the end of every line, his verses would be little better than what a body may call mere stuff.
Enter Dolly . DOLLY. You'll never write such good ones tho', for all your great wisdom, Mr. David.
DAVID. Ay, you're a good judge to be sure! I'm sure you could not read them though they were printed in big letters before your nose, hussy. You can tell us, I make no doubt of it, how his julep tastes, and how his breath smells after the garlic peels that he takes to lay the cold wind in his stomach, and how his ruffled night-cap becomes him too; for you have [150]   been very serviceable to him of late, and not very sparing of your visits to his chamber of an evening; but as for his verses, Mrs. Doll, you had better be quiet about them.
DOLLY. I say his verses are as pretty verses as any body would desire, and I don't care a rush what you say about his night-cap or his garlic.
DAVID. Lord, Lord! to hear how women will talk about what they don't understand! Let me see now if you
[Page 147]
know the meaning of the lines he has scratch'd on the middle pane of the north window:
“'Twas not that orient blush, that arm of snow,
“That eye's celestial blue, which caus'd my woe,
“'Twas thy exalted mind, my peace which stole,
“And all thy moving sympathy of soul.” Now, can you understand that, mistress madam?
DOLLY. I say the verses are very pretty verses, and what does it signify whether one understands them or not?
DAVID. And then upon the other pane close by it:
“Give me the maid, whose bosom high
“Doth often heave the tender sigh;
“Whose eye, suffus'd with tender care,
“Doth often shed the soft luxurious tear.” (To Jenkins.) Now this is Doll herself he means in [175]   these verses, for he came to this house the very day that the beggar-woman stole her new stockings from the side of the wash-tub, and I'm sure she shed as many tears about them as would have wash'd them as white as a lily, tho' they were none of the cleanest neither, it must be confess'd.—If I were to write poetry—
DOLLY. If you were to write poetry! Don't you remember when you made that bad metre for Goody
[Page 148]
Gibson's grave-stone, and all the parish laugh'd at it?
“All ye gentle christians who pass by,
“Upon this dumb stone cast a pitying eye;
“I pray you for yourselves, not me, bewail,
“I on life's follies now have turned tail.” And don't you remember when you went to church afterwards, how all the children of the village pointed with their fingers, and turn'd round their behinds to you as you pass'd? If you were to write poetry, forsooth!
DAVID. Devil take you, you filthy lying jade! it is well for you that I scorn to be angry with the likes of you.
DOLLY (laughing in his face).
“I pray ye for yourselves bewail,
“For I on life have turned tail.” (David takes up a stool and runs after her to cast it at her head) [200]   O mercy! my head, my head!
JENKINS (preventing him). Nay, David, I can't see a lady used ill in my presence. Consider, my good friend, a man in a passion may be compared to three things.
DAVID. Devil take your three things, and all the things that ever were in the world! If I but once get hold of her!

[Page 149]
Enter Landlady . LANDLADY. What's this noise for? are you all mad to make such a disturbance and gentle-folks in the house? I protest, as I am a living woman, you make my house more liker a Bedlam than a sober Inn for gentlefolks to stop at.
DAVID (still shaking his fist at Dolly). If I could get hold of her, I would dress her! I would curry-comb her!
LANDLADY. Won't you have done with it yet? curry-comb your horses, and let my maid alone. They stand in the stable poor things in dirty litter up to their bellies, while you sit here prating, and preaching as tho' you were the vicar of the parish.
DAVID. Must one be always attending upon a parcel of damn'd brutes, as tho' they were one's betters? must a body's arm never have a moment's rest?
LANDLADY. Let thy tongue rest a while, David: that is the member of thy body that has most reason to be tired. And as for you, Doll, mind your own work, and [225]   other people will leave you alone. Have you pluck'd the crows for the pidgeon-pye yet, and
[Page 150]
scraped the maggots from the stale mutton? well do I know there's ne'er a bit of all this done; we shall be put to such a hurry scurry to get the dinner dress'd, that all the nice victuals will be spoil'd (bell rings). O lud, lud! how they do ring them bells! Run and see what's wanted, Dolly. (Exit Dolly.) This comes of making a noise, now!
                                         (Exit Jenkins. DAVID. The greatest noise has been of your own making, I'm sure.
LANDLADY. O dear me! what will this house come to! It will turn my poor head at last.
Re-enter Dolly in a great hurry. DOLLY. A coach, a coach! a coach at the door, and fine ladies in it too as ever my eyes beheld.
LANDLADY. A coach say you? that's something indeed. I wish the stairs had been scower'd this morning. Run and light a fire in the blue chamber.
                                         (Exeunt Landlady and Dolly severally, in great haste. DAVID. I wonder what can bring these lady-folks out now in such cold weather as this. Have they never a fire at home to sit by, in a plague to them!
[Page 151]
They'll bring as many vile smoking beasts with them, as will keep my poor arms—
                                         (Exit grumbling. Re-enter Landlady , shewing in Lady Goodbody, Miss Martin , and Hannah , followed by a Maid, carrying boxes, &c. LANDLADY. O la, ladies! I am sorry the fires an't lit: but I have just ordered one to be lit in the blue chamber, [250]   and it will be ready immediately. I am sure your ladyships must be so cold; for it is to be sure the severest weather I ever see'd.
LADY GOODBODY. We shall warm ourselves here in the meantime.
MISS MARTIN. What place can be so comfortable in a frosty morning as a stool by the kitchen fire?
                                         (Sits down on a stool by the fire.) LANDLADY. O dear, ladies! here the chairs.
                                         (Sets chairs for them.) LADY GOODBODY (to Maid). Here is a seat for you too, Hopkins, sit down by the fire.

[Page 152]
HOPKINS. I thank you, my lady, I must look after the things in the coach.
                                         (Sets down the box, &c. and exit.) LADY GOODBODY (to Landlady). Have you many travellers, ma'am, in this road?
LANDLADY. O yes, my lady, a pretty many. We had a little time ago my Lady the Countess of Postaway, and a power of fine folks with her. It was a mighty cold day when she came, madam, and she was a mighty good humour'd lady to be sure: she sat by the fire here just in that very corner as your ladyship does now.
MISS MARTIN. It has been a highly-honour'd nook indeed.
LADY GOODBODY. Pray ma'am, what have you got in the house for dinner? for it snows so fast I think it will be impossible for us to get any further to-day.
LANDLADY. O la, to be sure! I have got, my lady, a nice pigeon-pie for dinner, and some very tender mutton. [275]   But do you know, my Lady Countess would dine upon nothing but a good dish of fried eggs and bacon, tho' we had some very nice things in the house I'll assure you. I don't say, to be sure, that quality
[Page 153]
are all fond of the same kinds of victuals; but sometimes it will so happen that pigeons will not be equally plump and delicate as at other times, let us do what we will with them, and the mutton being fed upon old grass, my lady; will now and then be a little strong tasted or so.—O dear me! if it had not been all eaten up two days ago, I could have given you such a nice turkey! it was to be sure as great a beauty as ever was put upon a spit. Howsomever, you may perhaps after all, ladies, prefer the eggs and bacon.
MISS MARTIN. Yes, my good ma'am; the eggs and bacon that may be eaten to-day will answer our purpose rather better than the turkey that was eaten yesterday.
LADY GOODBODY. Have you any company in the house?
LANDLADY. O yes, my lady, we have a good pleasant gentleman, who has been here these three days, because his servant was taken ill upon the road, Sir John Hazelwood, and his nephew with him; and we have a strange kind of a gentleman who has been here these three weeks, just to be quiet, as he says [300]   himself, and to study the musics, tho' I can't say we ever hear him play upon any thing neither. Howsomever, he diverts himself all day long after his
[Page 154]
own fashion, poor man, writing bits of metre upon the windows and such like, and does harm to nobody.
HANNAH (after gazing for a long time at the things ranged over the chimney). There is a pair of candlesticks the very same with those we had in our bed-room at the last inn: look if they an't, the very fellows to them cousin, all but the little bead round the sockets. (To Miss M.)
LADY GOODBODY (to Hannah). My good child, you are always observing things that nobody else notices. (To Miss M.) Sir John Hazelwood is an old acquaintance of mine; I'll let him know that I am here presently.
Enter Dolly . DOLLY. The room is ready, ladies, and the fire very good.
LADY GOODBODY. We shall go to it then. Let me have a candle, pray; I shall have some letters to seal by and by.
DOLLY. Yes, ma'am; and mistress got some wax ones when the great lady was here, I'll bring you one of them.

[Page 155]
LADY GOODBODY. No, no, child! a tallow one will do well enough.
                                         (Exeunt Lady Goodbody, Miss Martin, and Hannah, Landlady conducting them. Enter Will . WILL. Yes, Doll, give her a tallow candle, and a stinking one too.
DOLLY. The lady seems a very good lady, Mr. Sauce-box; and as to stinking candles I would have you to know we have no such things in the house.
WILL. [325]   That is plaguy unlucky then, for this is the first time since I came to the house that you have been without them.—Confound the old stingy hypocrite! I wish they smelt like carrion for her sake.
DOLLY. What makes you so bitter against the poor lady? I'm sure she is as civil a spoken lady as—
WILL. Yes, mighty civil, truly. I hate your smooth-spoken people: it is licking the butter off other people's bread that keeps their tongues so well oil'd. I drove like the devil to get here before the
[Page 156]
snow came on; I spared neither myself nor my cattle to please her, and what do you think I had for my pains?
DOLLY. I can't say: it is a long stage to be sure.
WILL. Paltry half-a-crown, an' be hang'd to her!
DOLLY. But why did you take so much pains to please her? I never knew you do so before, but when you were promised a bribe for your trouble.
WILL. Because I tell you she's a hypocrite, and would deceive Old Nick, if he were not as cunning as herself. When we passed thro' Middleton she bought as many coarse stockings as would have stocked a hosier's shop; and her maid told me they were all to be sent to her own estate to be given to the poor of the neighbourhood; so, thinks I to myself, this [350]   must be some rich liberal lady that gives away money with both hands, I won't stand upon trifles with her, and off I set like the deuce. But 'tis all a cursed lie: she'll sell them again, I'll be bound for it, and make a groat of profit upon every pair. I'll be revenged upon her! Hark ye, Doll; I'll give thee a new top-knot if thou'lt help me in any way to be revenged upon her.

[Page 157]
DOLLY. Nay, nay, you promised me one last fair, Will, and brought me home nothing but a twopenny bun after all. I know you well enough; so you may play your tricks off by yourself: I'll have nothing to do with you.
                                         (Exit. WILL. What ails the wench now, I wonder; ever since that there poet, as they call him, has been in the house, she has spoken to me as if I were a pair of old boots.
                                         (Exit. SCENE II. A Parlour. Enter Sir John Hazelwood and Worshipton . SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Well, Ned, here is a rich heiress unexpectedly fallen in our way; you or I for her?
WORSHIPTON. If women favour'd men for their merit, Sir John, I should not presume to enter the lists with you: but, luckily, they prefer a good complexion to a good understanding; a well-made leg to what my grandmother used to call a well-order'd mind; and a very little fashion to a great deal of philosophy; which makes us good-for-nothing fellows come farther into their good graces than wiser men think we are entitled to.

[Page 158]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. You are very humble and very diffident truly: the meaning of what you say being simply this, that you are a mighty handsome fellow. Well, be it so; make as much of your personal qualifications as you can: it were hard indeed if they did not stand you in some good account, since you and your fashionable brotherhood take no pains to acquire any other.
WORSHIPTON. And they will stand us in good account, my good sir. Upon my honour we treat the sex in a much fairer manner than you do. She who marries one of us sees what she gets, but he who pretends to a woman on the score of his mental accomplishments, [25]   holds out to her a most deceitful lure. A man's temper and opinions may change, but he always wears the same pair of legs.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. There is some reason in this, I confess: and there is one advantage you have in thus tricking out your four quarters for the market,—they are in no danger of going off for less than they are worth. Your man of ton, as you call it, most commonly ends his career by marrying just such a woman as he deserves.

[Page 159]
WORSHIPTON. End his career! who the devil would marry if it were not to prolong it? A man may indeed sometimes be tempted to marry a fashonable beauty to please his vanity.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Or break his heart.
WORSHIPTON. Poh, poh! there are more people who die of broken heads now o' days. A man may sometimes marry a woman of rank to be look'd up to by his old friends.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Or down upon by his new ones.
WORSHIPTON. You are crusty now.—But a rich wife is the only one who can really excuse a young fellow for taking upon himself the sober name of husband.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. If this is your opinion, you had better still retain the more sprightly one of bachelor.
WORSHIPTON. [50]   And leave the heiress to you, Sir John.

[Page 160]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. No, Worshipton; there is not a woman now existing, as the world goes, that would suit me; and I verily think that here as I stand, with all my opinions and habits about me, I would suit no woman: I must e'en remain as I am.
WORSHIPTON. I wish to God I could do so too: I should ask no better.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. What should hinder you, young man?
WORSHIPTON. I am under the necessity of marrying: my circumstances oblige me to it.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I am at a loss to comprehend the necessity you talk of.
WORSHIPTON. Will three hundred a year and a commission in the army keep a man's pocket in loose money, my good sir, support a groom and valet, a pair of riding horses, and a curricle?
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I crave your pardon, sir: these things being necessaries, you are perfectly in the right; and if
[Page 161]
you choose to impose a disagreeable restraint upon yourself for such necessaries, nobody has any right to find fault with you.
WORSHIPTON. Impose upon myself a restraint! Ha! ha! ha! pardon me! this is rather an amusing idea of yours.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. [75]   Why, you would not be base enough to marry a woman and neglect her.
WORSHIPTON. No, Sir John; I should pay her as much attention as women of the world now expect, and she who is not satisfied with that must be a fool.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Well, pray heaven you may find one wise enough to be satisfied with you! But if you seriously mean to pay your addresses to Sir Rowland's heiress, you must inform her of the real state of your affairs. I'll have no advantage taken of a young woman under my eye, tho' it should be for the interest of my family.
WORSHIPTON. I shall pretend to nothing but what she may be ascertained of if she has eyes in her head.

[Page 162]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. No, not so easily ascertained as you imagine. There is many a handsome man in the world whom nature never made so. Flattery has softened many a rugged visage, and lick'd many an awkward cub into shape; and he who takes this method of becoming a pretty fellow before marriage, is bound in honour to continue it, that he may still remain such after marriage.
WORSHIPTON. What! must I be repeating the same thing to her all my life long? Tell a woman once in plain English that she is charming, and there is no danger [100]   of her forgetting it.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Well, deal honourably, and I shall rejoice in your success.—But I must go to the stable and give directions to my groom: I shall return presently.
                                         (Exit. WORSHIPTON (alone). Honourably! yes, yes, we are all mighty conscientious in every thing that is for the interest of another. But watch me as you please, my good Sir John, you shan't find me out. What a plaguy thing it is to have an uncle of forty-one! What a devil of an age it is! for one has but little hope of a legacy from it, and it has, at the same time, all the cold, cautious, advice-giving spirit of
[Page 163]
three score and ten. This Sir Rowland's daughter is a good scheme upon my soul. He must be sickly, I think, from his always living at home in such a retired situation. I dare say he'll die soon, and who knows but the lady may step off too, being of a sickly stock. Yes, I feel a persuasion within me that I am born to be a lucky fellow. But hush! here come the ladies. The fat aunt walks first, and the rich heiress follows. A genteel-looking woman, faith! this is admirable luck. But who is this awkward creature that comes sneaking after them? some humble relation, I suppose.
Enter Lady Goodbody, Miss Martin and Hannah . LADY GOODBODY. I beg pardon if I have made any mistake; I [125]   thought Sir John Hazelwood—
WORSHIPTON. There is no mistake, madam; Sir John will be here immediately. Permit me to place chairs.
LADY GOODBODY. You are very obliging, but we have sat so long in a close carriage this morning, that we should be glad to stand a little while. Sir John's politeness has made him sacrifice his own convenience, I am afraid.

[Page 164]
WORSHIPTON. I am sure he is well repaid in the honour he receives. (To Miss Martin.) I hope, ma'am, you feel no bad effects from the cold journey you have had?
MISS MARTIN. None at all, I thank you; we have just felt cold enough to make a warm room very comfortable after it.
WORSHIPTON. What a charming disposition, thus to extract pleasure from uneasiness?
MISS MARTIN. The merit of finding a good fire comfortable after a cold winter journey, is one that may be claim'd without much diffidence.
LADY GOODBODY. Pray, sir, did you ever see such a heavy fall of snow come on so suddenly?
WORSHIPTON. Really, madam, I don't recollect. (Turning again to Miss Martin.) But it is the character of true merit—

[Page 165]
LADY GOODBODY. [150]   Pardon me, sir, you have something of the family face; are you not related to Sir John?
WORSHIPTON. I have the honour to be his nephew, madam. (Turning again to Miss Martin.) I shall fall in love with rough weather for this day's good fortune.
LADY GOODBODY. I suppose, sir, you are acquainted with the family of the Mapletofts in your county?
WORSHIPTON. I believe I have seen them. (Turning again to Miss Martin, and continuing to speak to her with much devotion.)
LADY GOODBODY (to Hannah). Well, my dear, you and I must talk together I find. How did you like the country we pass'd thro' to day?
HANNAH. La, aunt! it is just like our own; I saw no difference.
LADY GOODBODY. You are foolish, child! is not our's a flat country clothed with trees, and this a bare and hilly one?

[Page 166]
HANNAH. La, I did not look out of the coach windows all the way, except when we stopp'd at the turnpike; and I'm sure it is a little tiled house with a gate by the side of it, just like the one near our own entry; only that our's has got a pear-tree on the wall, and it has got some dried turf piled up by the door, with a part of an old wheelbarrow.
LADY GOODBODY. Well, you'll have more observation by and by, I hope.
Enter Sir John Hazelwood . SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I am happy in the honour of seeing your ladyship and these fair ladies.
LADY GOODBODY. [175]   And we reckon ourselves particularly fortunate in meeting with you, Sir John; you are very good indeed to give up so much of your own accommodation to poor storm-bound travellers. Allow me to present my nieces to you. (After presenting her nieces.) It is a long time since we met, Sir John, you were then a mere lad, and I was not myself a very old woman.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I remember perfectly the last time I had the
[Page 167]
pleasure of seeing your ladyship, tho' being a bachelor still, I don't care to say how long it is ago. Your brother Sir Rowland was with you then; I hope he is well.
LADY GOODBODY. He is very well: I ought to have introduced his daughter to you particularly. (Sir John going up to Miss Martin.) No, no! this (pointing to Hannah) is my brother Rowland's daughter. She is somewhat like her mother, who died, as you know, at a very early age, leaving him but this child.
                                         (Worshipton, who is about to present with much devotion a glove to Miss Martin, which she had dropped, lets it fall out of his hand, and retiring some paces back, stares with astonishment at Hannah.) SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (to Hannah). I am happy to have this opportunity of paying my respect to the daughter of my old friend. I hope, madam, you will admit of this plea for being better acquainted.
LADY GOODBODY (aside to Hannah). Answer him child.
HANNAH (curtsying awkwardly). My father is very well, I thank you, sir.

[Page 168]
MISS MARTIN (looking slyly at Worshipton). [200]   I fancy, after all, I must pick up this glove myself. I am afraid some sudden indisposition—
WORSHIPTON (confusedly). I beg pardon! I—I have a slight pain in my jaw-bone; I believe it is the tooth-ach.
LADY GOODBODY. The tooth-ach! how I pity you! there is no pain in the world so bad. But I have a cure for it that I always carry about in my pocket for the good of myself and my friends: do swallow some drops of it; it will cure you presently (offering him a phial).
WORSHIPTON (retreating from her). You are infinitely obliging, madam, but I never take any thing for it.
LADY GOODBODY (following him with the phial). Do take it, and hold it in your mouth for some time before you swallow it. It is very nauseous, but it will cure you.
WORSHIPTON (still retreating). Pray, madam, be so obliging as to excuse me: I cannot possibly swallow it.

[Page 169]
LADY GOODBODY (pressing it still more earnestly). Indeed, indeed, it will cure you, and I must positively insist upon your taking it.
WORSHIPTON (defending himself vehemently). Positively then, madam, you oblige me to say— (breaking suddenly away.) Pest take all the drugs in the world! (Aside.)
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. You must not, Lady Goodbody, insist on curing a man against his will: he likes the pain perhaps; let him enjoy it.
WORSHIPTON (returning). Indeed I am very much obliged to your ladyship; [225]   I am much better now. Forgive my impatience; I don't know what I said.
LADY GOODBODY. I am very glad you are better, and I forgive you with all my heart, tho' it is a remedy that I have long had the greatest faith in, distill'd by myself from the very best ingredients, and has cured a great many people, I assure you. (To Sir John.) So you took this lady for Sir Rowland's daughter? (pointing to Miss Martin.) Do you see no traces in her countenance of my sister and Colonel Martin? She lost both her parents early, and she has ever since been my child.

[Page 170]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. You are happy in having such a daughter.
LADY GOODBODY. I am so: she is a very good girl, and has many excellent qualities, which young women now a-days do but rarely possess.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I dare say she is a most amiable companion, whom you would be very unwilling to part with.
LADY GOODBODY. Nay, Sir John, I am not so selfish neither, but that I should willingly give her up to a good husband.
MISS MARTIN (aside to Lady Goodbody). Bless me, ma'am, why will you do this? you know I can't bear it. (Aloud to Sir John.) You must not trust Lady Goodbody's account of me; for if she thought size necessary to make a woman perfect, it would be difficult to persuade her that I [250]   am not six feet high.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Excuse me, ma'am, I have always trusted to Lady Goodbody's opinions, and have never felt more inclination to do so than at this moment.

[Page 171]
LADY GOODBODY. She always behaves like a fool when she is praised, and, excepting this, I don't know a fault that she has. (Enter a Servant, announcing dinner.) (To Miss Martin.) Go before, my dear, and place my chair as you know I like it. (Exit Miss Martin, followed by Sir John, leading out Lady Goodbody.)
WORSHIPTON (looking askance at Hannah, and then going up to her with an unwilling shrug). Permit me to have the honour—
                                         (Exit, handing her out.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.

[Page 172]
ACT II. SCENE I. Lady Goodbody, Miss Martin, and Hannah, Sir John Hazelwood, Worshipton, and Amaryllis, discovered sitting by a table, with wine and glasses, &c. before them. LADY GOODBODY. But indeed, my dear Sir John, you ought to marry.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Indeed, my dear Lady Goodbody, I can't see that I am in duty bound so to do.
LADY GOODBODY. Ah, but you are tho'! It would have made your good worthy grandmother so happy to have seen children of yours growing up to preserve the honours of the family.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. It is too late now to think of pleasing my grandmother after she has been twenty years in her grave: your ladyship must offer some other argument to convince me.

[Page 173]
LADY GOODBODY. You owe it to your country then: all families who have good fortunes and good blood in their veins, should be kept up for the sake of their country. Is not every body sorry when a house of this kind becomes extinct?
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. If I thought my estates would cease to bear corn and hay upon them in possession of a different family, I should marry to-morrow for the good of the country most certainly. I should be very sorry to be sure to make every body sorry for my want of heirs: but I remember when my neighbour Squire Wheelbarrow lost his only son, there was as much [25]   merry-making, and as much ale drank at the very next fair, upon his own estate too, as if nobody had cared a rush about the matter. I believe you must produce some stronger reason still, my lady.
WORSHIPTON. Yes, do keep it up, madam! don't let him off so easily.
LADY GOODBODY (gayly). For the sake of the ladies then, Sir John, you ought to be a bachelor no longer.
WORSHIPTON. Now your ladyship attacks him from a strong post.

[Page 174]
AMARYLLIS. Now, madam, you touch the finest chord of the soul's harmony.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. She does; I allow it. But I contend that I am of more service to the ladies in my present state than I could possibly be in any other. Have I not danced at our country balls with all the neglected damsels who could find no partners to lead them out for these ten years past? and do I not still serve as a forlorn hope to half the desponding maidens and unsettled widows of the west-riding of Yorkshire?
WORSHIPTON (to Lady Goodbody). Upon my honour, madam, he tells you serious truth as to the neglected damsels, for he has danced with them so often, that it would be no longer the fashion for any other kind of damsels to dance with him if he had not too good an estate to be [50]   rejected.
LADY GOODBODY. Your services to the ladies are too general, Sir John; to make one deserving woman happy is the best way of shewing your respect for them.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. And what lady, my good madam, will expect happiness from an elderly rusticated bachelor?

[Page 175]
LADY GOODBODY. No sensible woman dislikes an agreeable man because he may be past the heyday of his life. My niece here (pointing to Miss Martin) has often said to her giddy companions, that an agreeable man of forty is preferable to the frivolous young men of the world that one meets with every where now-a-days.
MISS MARTIN. You would oblige me very much, my dear madam, if you would speak your own sentiments, without doing me the honour to make me so much wiser than I pretend to be.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. If your ladyship pleases we shall drop this subject. I am obliged to you for your friendly advice, but it is not in my power to profit by it; for I cannot, for the mere love of being married, yoke myself to a bad wife; and I am so capricious and so strange with my old rooted habits, that I really don't deserve to have a good one.
WORSHIPTON. That is the very case with him, madam; he must have, forsooth, such a woman as the sun never beheld: [75]   a woman of wit who holds her tongue; a good housewife who teizes nobody with her economy;
[Page 176]
and a woman who knows the world, and yet prefers retirement in the country, and his honour's amiable conversation to every thing in it. May I be—if ever I require more of any woman than to be well dress'd and look pretty as long as I live.
LADY GOODBODY (to Sir John). Do you tolerate oaths in your presence?
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I don't at least encourage them by my example.
WORSHIPTON. How should you, my good sir? you bury yourself so much in the country you scarcely know what oaths are in use.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. That is not my reason for abstaining from them, however: if ever I should betake myself to swearing, I shall give myself very little concern about the fashion of the oath; ods bodikins will do well enough for me, and lack-a-daysy for my wife, if I should ever be happy enough, following Lady Goobody's advice, to have one. But Mr. Amaryllis are you silent all this while? it is surely your turn next to tell us what kind of a woman you prefer: some very refined being undoubtedly.
AMARYLLIS. Beauty, wit, fashion, and economy are prized by
[Page 177]
most men, Sir John, but let the maid whose tender [100]   sensibility, whose soft delicacy, whose sympathy of soul gently animates her countenance, be my portion, and every other thing I can dispense with.
MISS MARTIN. You three gentlemen, at least, are so far lucky in your tastes, that you are in no danger of ever becoming rivals.
LADY GOODBODY. I must own, however, Sir John's choice appears to me to be the most reasonable, and not so difficult to be met with neither. My nieces spend many lonely months in the country with me, and Miss Martin prefers it, tho' she is naturally of a gay disposition; why should we not believe then that there are many young women in the world of the same character?
MISS MARTIN (aside to Lady Goodbody). For heaven's sake, ma'am, give this up! you'll put me beside myself.
LADY GOODBODY (aside to Miss Martin). You're a fool, and don't know when one is serving you.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (to Miss Martin). There is nothing can be said in your praise, madam, that will not be readily credited; but to prefer country retirement, and a bachelor past the
[Page 178]
noon of his days, is a singular taste for a young and gay woman.
MISS MARTIN. Perhaps it is so: but unluckily it is one to which I make not the smallest pretensions. I love the [125]   amusements of town to a folly; retirement is irksome to me; and I hate a capricious old— (stopping short as if shocked at herself, with great embarrassment.)
LADY GOODBODY (very angrily). Miss Martin: how can you be so perverse!
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Pray, my dear madam, let us not fall out about this foolish jest which we have kept up too long. Here comes a strange original old fellow who is in the custom of amusing us a little after dinner, but he forgets that there are ladies with us at present.
LADY GOODBODY. Pray let him come, we shall be glad to hear him talk a little.
Enter David . DAVID (to Sir John). A good afternoon to your honour.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. How do you do, my honest friend David?

[Page 179]
DAVID. As well as a dry mouth and an empty head will allow a poor silly fellow like me to be.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Ay, David, wise men always speak modestly of themselves, tho' they don't insist upon every body believing them. Here is something for thy dry mouth; you must drink a bumper to the ladies' healths.
DAVID. Such ladies as these deserve bumpers a-piece to their healths.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. So they do; and here's the first for you.
                                         (Filling him a glass.) DAVID (drinking). My humble respects to your Ladyship.
                                         (To Lady Goodbody.) LADY GOODBODY. I'm proud of the respect of so wise a man, Mr. David.
DAVID. [150]   O Lord, madam, why should I be held in any account? What tho' a body may have a better understanding of things, and a better way of setting
[Page 180]
his words in order, as it were, than another; 'tis all but the gift of God, and why should a body be proud of it?
MISS MARTIN. But folks will be proud of any gift, Mr. David, unless they be endued, like you, with the rare gift of modesty also.
DAVID. Faith, young lady, you're in the rights of it there. Here's to your very good health: here's to your secret inclinations.
MISS MARTIN. I thank you; but you are waggish as well as wise.
DAVID. O yes, madam! nothing comes amiss to me. After I have been talking, mehap of the Pope, or the Emperor, or the land-tax, or the solemn league and covenant, I can just go and break my jests among the women as if I were no better than one of themselves.
MISS MARTIN. How wonderfully condescending to the poor silly women!
DAVID. O yes, madam, I have no pride about me: I can just talk like one of themselves. (Drinking to
[Page 181]
Hannah.) My service to you, young lady. (Raising his voice.) Yes, yes, commend me to the women: they [175]   don't envy any little wit that one may have. But conscience, I care for the face of no man! (Looking at Amaryllis.) Some of them, mehap, have read more books than me, and can tell you the Latin for one word and the Greek for another, and the likes o' that; but for good deep sense, and a knack at a comparison, I'll defy the best of them all. Ods dickens! I could find ye out a similitude for the sun, moon, and stars, in the paring of a black pudding's end.
                                         (Laughing without, and Will's head seen peeping at the door which David had left a-jar.) SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. What's that?
DAVID. By my troth, I've forgot my errand! I have brought the poor girl who sings so well to divert your honours, and she is waiting at the door with some ill-manner'd companions along with her.
LADY GOODBODY. Pray bring her in, we shall be glad to have a song from her.
                                         (David goes to the door, and leading in Sally, shuts it in Will's face with great indignation.) DAVID (to Sally). Come in, hussey, and let those sneering varlets
[Page 182]
amuse themselves. Sing the ladies one of your new songs.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I believe they would rather have one of your old ones.
SALLY. Will you please to have the Sailor's Courtship to the Tinker's Daughter; or, “My tatter'd Hose and clouted Shoon”?
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. [200]   I rather think the clouted shoon will do best.
SONG.

Tho' richer swains thy love pursue,
In Sunday geer, and bonnets new;
And ev'ry fair before thee lay
Their silken gifts with colours gay;
They love thee not, alas! so well
As one who sighs and dares not tell;
Who haunts thy dwelling, night and noon
In tatter'd hose and clouted shoon.

I grieve not for my wayward lot,
My empty folds, my roofless cot;
Nor hateful pity, proudly shown,
Nor alter'd looks, nor friendship flown;
Nor yet my dog with lanken sides,
Who by his master still abides;
But how will Nan prefer my boon,
In tatterd hose and clouted shoon!
[Page 183]
MISS MARTIN. She has a charming voice, and sings with some skill.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Who taught you these songs, Sally?
SALLY. My father, sir; he's a fid—
DAVID (pinching her arm aside). Fiddler an't genteel; say he's a musicianer.
SALLY. He's a musicianer, sir.
                                         (Worshipton laughs impertinently, and stares at Sally, who keeps retiring in confusion as he still continues to stare, and at last runs out.) DAVID. Is the sheep-faced fool gone?
                                         (Exit after her in great indignation. WORSHIPTON (to Amaryllis). Let us go and coax her to return.
                                         (Exit Worshipton and Amaryllis. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. [225]   She is very young, and we must excuse her.

[Page 184]
LADY GOODBODY. There are more people here than her who ought to plead the same excuse. Miss Martin, you have behaved very strangely, and can only be pardoned on account of your youth.
MISS MARTIN. I have done so many foolish things for six-and-twenty years past, that you are really very good, my dear madam, to pardon me on that score.
LADY GOODBODY. What do you mean? what do you mean, child, by calling yourself older than you are?
MISS MARTIN. I have been of age these five years, and most people, I believe, will call that six-and-twenty.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Your servant, ladies, we shall meet again at the tea-table.
                                         (Exit. LADY GOODBODY. Very well, very well, Miss Martin! since you will be six-and-twenty, tho' you know well enough you want two months and a half of it, with all my heart. But allow me to tell you, a maiden of that age should look pretty sharply about her if she would not still remain a lonely maiden all her life.

[Page 185]
MISS MARTIN. I am sure it were better to remain a lonely maiden all my life than take up with such pitiful company as some of your good matrons do, and rather more respectable too.
LADY GOODBODY. No, child; a married woman is always more [250]   respectable than a single one, let her be married to whom she will.
MISS MARTIN. Indeed! Can one give to another what he is not possess'd of himself? Can a woman receive any additional respectability because some drivelling, insignificant man, whom all the world despises, has put a wedding-ring upon her finger!—ha! ha! ha! But I suppose a good settlement is the honour your Ladyship means.
LADY GOODBODY. No, indeed: I say, every married woman is more respectable than a single one, independently of all settlements. What else do you think would have induced me, with the fortune I had, to marry Sir Benjamin Goodbody? for his person was disagreeable, and his best friends admitted he was no conjurer. Don't mistake me, however, I mean no disrespect to his memory. He was a very good man, and I have lamented him sincerely. And what else
[Page 186]
do you think would have induced my cousin Frances to give her hand to that poor puny creature, Mr. Perewinkle, but to place herself in this respectable state.
MISS MARTIN. Ha! ha! ha! I did not expect to hear such strong examples quoted from my own family.
LADY GOODBODY. Don't make a jest of it: I speak seriously, and [275]   you ought to think seriously.
MISS MARTIN. I think very seriously that, if you would not pester me continually with attempts to make up a match for me with every man of fortune that falls in our way, I should be very happy, my dear aunt, to live still with you, and take care of your declining years, in return for the tenderness and attention you have bestowed on my youth. Why would you put me away from you? are you tired of my company?
LADY GOODBODY. Oh, Mary! talk not of taking care of my declining years: I should be contented to be crippled or bed-ridden all my life, could I but see you happily and honourably married.
MISS MARTIN (kissing Lady Goodbody's hand tenderly). My dear aunt! pardon my petulance and eagerness.
[Page 187]
I will strive to please you more: but do give up the present pursuit, I beseech you.
LADY GOODBODY. No, no, my dear! I love you too well for that. But I am unfit to say any thing to you at present.
                                         (Exit. MISS MARTIN (looking after her). My dear, kind, perverse aunt! you will be the death of me. (To Hannah.) Come, my dear, we'll retire to our rooms too. What have you been thinking of all this time?
HANNAH. I have just been wondering whether my grandmother was christened Hannah or Hanabella.
MISS MARTIN. What puts that into your head?
HANNAH. [300]   Because Mr. Worshipton said at dinner, when my aunt call'd me Hannah, that she should have call'd me Hanabella, which is a prettier name.
MISS MARTIN. Mr. Worshipton has been amusing himself.—Oh heigh ho! I wish we were at home again, in our old mansion in the north.

[Page 188]
Enter Hopkins . HOPKINS (gently putting her hand on Miss Martin's shoulder). My dear child! pardon the liberty: I still feel for you the affection of a dry nurse: what is the matter with you?
MISS MARTIN. Still the old grievance, my dear Hopkins; my aunt trying to make up a match for me.
HOPKINS. Ay, poor good lady: she can't leave that alone for the soul of her. She would make up matches at home for every country girl in the neighbourhood if she could. I even believe, if I had not been once married already, which she thinks sufficient for the credit of any woman, she would still be for trying to make up a match for my old crazy bones, God help me!—But don't let it vex you thus, my dear ma'am: I have brought you something that will please and divert you.
MISS MARTIN. What is that, Hopkins?
HOPKINS. A letter from my little boy whom my lady puts to school, written with his own hand, dear little
[Page 189]
fellow! and the first he ever wrote in his life. It [325]   begins “Dear Mother,” and all as pretty as any other letter.
MISS MARTIN. I thank you, my good Hoppy! I shall indeed have a pleasure in reading it. Go with me to my room, and shew it me there: it does my ill-humour good to see thee so happy; I will strive to think less of my own concerns.
                                         (Exeunt. SCENE II. A small room leading to other rooms in the house: Jenkins discovered standing at one of the doors, behind which hang great coats, &c. beckoning to somebody who does not appear; presently enters Worshipton, stepping upon tiptoe. WORSHIPTON. Thou hast some intelligence for me?
                                         (In a low voice.) JENKINS. Yes; the old lady and her woman are coming this way presently to go to Miss Martin's room, and the heiress will follow them as soon as she can find a glove that she is searching for. I heard this just now as I listen'd at her door; so conceal yourself here amongst these great coats for a few minutes, and you may way-lay her as she passes.
                                         (Speaking in a half whisper.)
[Page 190]
WORSHIPTON. Is my uncle still reading in the next chamber?
JENKINS. I believe so. (Going to a door at the bottom of the stage, and listening) He is just now rising to go away. (Worshipton shrinks back, and is going hastily out.) No, no! don't be afraid; he is gone out the other way to visit old Rycroft, I suppose.
WORSHIPTON (speaking in a loud voice). Good then: we shall have the coast clear: let us hide ourselves. Thou must remain with me, for I may have occasion for thee.
                                         (Hide themselves amongst the great coats.) Enter Lady Goodbody and Hopkins , talking as they enter. LADY GOODBODY (in rather a low voice). Very true, Hopkins, and if my god-daughter turns out an industrious girl, I'll add something to what she saves myself, to get her a husband; for you know she is not very sightly.
HOPKINS (in a loud voice, having lingered some paces behind to pick up something she has dropt). Ay, there is plenty of husbands to be had, my Lady, tho' a girl be ever so homely, if she have but money enough.
                                         (Exeunt Lady Goodbody and Hopkins.)
[Page 191]
WORSHIPTON (behind the door). [25]   Ay, they are talking of their heiress now. They are devilishly suspicious of designs upon her, but we'll jockey them for all that. Ha! here comes the game.
Enter Hannah (and Worshipton comes from his concealment). HANNAH. O la! are you there, Mr. Worshipton? I saw nobody here but the great coats hanging by the wall.
WORSHIPTON. You are not offended, I hope, that a great coat should be turned into something that can speak to you, and gaze upon you, and admire you, Miss Clodpate.
                                         (Ogling her.) HANNAH. La, now! it is so droll!
JENKINS (peeping from his hiding-place). Droll enough, by my faith!
WORSHIPTON. I have been waiting here concealed a long time for this happiness; for your aunt is so jealous I can
[Page 192]
find no opportunity of speaking to you. She knows well enough it is impossible to behold such beauty and attraction without—pardon me: you know very well what I would say to you if I durst.
HANNAH. La, no! how should I know. Do you mean that I am beautiful, and what d'ye call it?
WORSHIPTON. Indeed I do: your beauty must be admired, tho' your prudent aunt does all she can to conceal it.
HANNAH. La, now! you say so because my hair has been allowed to grow so long, and aunt and every body [50]   says that my ears are the prettiest thing about me. But it an't aunt's fault: I shall have it cut when we go to town.
                                         (Putting her hair behind her ears awkwardly with her fingers, and beginning to look rather brisk.) WORSHIPTON (looking at them with affected admiration). O, beautiful indeed!
JENKINS (peeping from his hiding-place). Ay, I thought the beauty lay hid under some snug covert or other: it was devilishly well conceal'd by my faith!

[Page 193]
HANNAH. La, now! did you think they were as pretty as they are?
WORSHIPTON. I must confess I should have expected to find them somewhat of a longer shape. But conceal them for pity's sake, my charming Hannah: this is dangerous.
HANNAH. Hanabella, you know.
WORSHIPTON. O yes, Hanabella I mean. It is dangerous to look upon so much beauty, when one at the same time thinks of the extraordinary accomplishments of your mind.
HANNAH. La, now! who has told you that I got by heart six whole parts of the hundred and nineteenth psalm, word for word, in the space of two mornings only, and every body said it was very extraordinary? Somebody has told it you I know.
WORSHIPTON. No, nobody; I just found it out myself.
HANNAH. La, now! that is so wonderful! Aunt herself
[Page 194]
[75]   said that my cousin Martin could not have done it so well.
WORSHIPTON. Your cousin Martin! would any one compare you together? Don't you know how much every body is delighted with you?
HANNAH. La, no! nobody tells me any thing about it.
WORSHIPTON. Indeed! that is very extraordinary: but they have their own ends in that. Don't they watch you, and keep always somebody near you?
HANNAH. To be sure my aunt often desires my cousin to take care of me when we go out.
WORSHIPTON. I thought so.—Ah! my charming Hanabella!
                                         (Sighs two or three times, but she continues staring vacantly, without taking any notice of it.) JENKINS (aside to Worshipton as he walks near his hiding place, rather at a loss what to do). Give a good heavy grunt, sir, and she'll ask what's the matter with you: mere sighing is no more to her than the blowing of your nose.

[Page 195]
WORSHIPTON (ogling Hannah, and giving a groan). Oh! oh!
HANNAH. La! what is the matter with you? have you the stomach ach? My aunt can cure that.
WORSHIPTON. Nay, my dear Hanabella, it is yourself that must cure me. I have got the heart-ach. It is your pity I must implore. (Kneeling and taking her hand.)
HANNAH. O, sure now! to see you kneeling so—it is so droll! I don't know what to say, it is so droll.
WORSHIPTON. Say that you will be mine, and make me happy: there is nothing a lover can do, that I will not do [100]   to please you.
HANNAH. Miss Languish's lover made songs upon her.
WORSHIPTON. I'll do so too, or any thing: but don't let your aunt know that I have spoken to you, she would be so angry.
HANNAH. O no! she is very fond of people being married.

[Page 196]
WORSHIPTON. Yes, but she will be angry at us tho'; so don't tell her, nor Miss Martin, nor any body a word of the matter. Do promise this, my charming Hanabella! my life depends upon it. (Kneeling again, and taking her hand.) O don't pull away from me this fair hand!
HANNAH. La! I'm sure I an't pulling it away.
WORSHIPTON (starting up suddenly from his knees). There's somebody coming. (Runs out and leaves Hannah strangely bewildered, and not knowing where to run.)
HANNAH. O dear, dear! what shall I do?
Enter Hopkins . HOPKINS. What is the matter, Miss Clodpate? My Lady sent me to see what is become of you: are you frightened for any thing, that you keep standing here in such a strange manner?
HANNAH. O la, no! but I just thought somehow, that you would think there was somebody with me. (Hopkins looks about the room suspiciously.) O no: you
[Page 197]
need not look for any body: those are only great coats by the wall, you see; and Mr. Worshipton's an't there, you see; for his has got five capes to it, [125]   and the cloth is of a much lighter colour, and it has got more button-holes to it too than any body's else in the house.
HOPKINS (still staring strangely about). Mr. Worshipton's! was he here?
HANNAH. La, no! an't I just telling you that he an't here.
HOPKINS (aside). Well this is droll enough too—but no, no! it can't be any thing neither. (Aloud.) Your aunt is impatient for you, Miss Clodpate.
HANNAH. O la! I'm going to her directly.
                                         (Exeunt Hannah and Hopkins. JENKINS (coming forward from his hiding-place, and shrugging up his shoulders as he looks after Hannah). This is the price my master is willing to pay for his curricle and his horses.
Re-enter Worshipton . WORSHIPTON. I think we have done pretty well, Jenkins, for the first onset.

[Page 198]
JENKINS. Yes to be sure, sir; but—but—
WORSHIPTON. But what, Jenkins?
JENKINS. Pardon my freedom, sir:—but don't you think she is rather too great a fool for—
WORSHIPTON. Poh! poh! poh! she is all the better for that: it is a great advantage, and one that I am certain of.
JENKINS. As to the certainty of it nobody will dispute that, I believe.
WORSHIPTON. Don't trouble thy head about it, if I'm satisfied. And remember the caution I gave you to say nothing, in the way of asking questions at the servants, to lead them to suspect what we are about.
JENKINS. [150]   Don't be afraid of that, sir: I can't if I would; for the man-servant that attends them is a country booby, who has not been in the family a fortnight, and knows nothing at all about it; and my Lady's woman, with her staunch old-fashion'd notions, has
[Page 199]
taken such a dislike to me that I hate to have any thing to say to her.
WORSHIPTON. So much the better. Yes, yes! things will go swimmingly on: I shall soon jockey them all.
                                         (Exeunt. SCENE III. A chamber all littered over with books, papers, old coats, shoes, &c. &c. Amaryllis discovered sitting by a table with a pen in his hand, and paper before him. After musing some time, he writes, and then blots out what he has written. AMARYLLIS (to himself). This won't do: it does not sound well. What a teasing thing it is, when one has got a beautiful line, to be stopp'd thus for want of a good rhyme to couple with it! (repeating with great emphasis and gesticulation)
“On thy ideal pinions let me fly,
“High-soaring Fancy, far above the sky:
“Beyond the starry sphere towering sublime,
“Where vulgar thought hath never dar'd to— No, climb does not please me: it is too heavy a motion for thought. (Musing and rubbing his forehead.)
“Beyond all thought inspiring vulgar rhyme.” No, that won't do neither. (Musing again and biting his nails.) Pest take it! if I should bite my
[Page 200]
fingers to the quick it won't come to me. (A gentle knock at the door.) Who's there? (in an angry voice.)
DOLLY (half opening the door). 'Tis I, sir: does your fire want coals?
AMARYLLIS (in a softened voice). O, it is you, Dolly. Come in and see, my good girl. (Enter Dolly , and pretends to be busy in putting the room in order, whilst Amaryllis takes his pen and begins several times to write, but as often lays it down again, looking at the same time over his shoulder at her.) Plague take it! she puts it all out of my head. (Leans his arm on the table for some time, still looking frequently about to her.) Faith, I believe she has a sneaking kindness for me, she finds always so many little things to do in my room. She's a good, rosy, tight girl, on my soul! (Aside.) No, my [25]   pretty Dolly, that book is too heavy for you: I'll put it in its place. (Getting up with great animation, and running to her.)
DOLLY. O no, sir! I'll do it very well myself. I just thought, as how your room would be in confusion, and so—
AMARYLLIS. And so you came to put my head into confusion too, you little baggage.

[Page 201]
DOLLY. O sure! I hope not, sir.
AMARYLLIS. You're a sly gipsy, Dolly. But you think of me sometimes then, eh? (Pinching her ear and patting her cheek.)
WORSHIPTON (without). Amaryllis! Amaryllis! are you at home, Amaryllis?
                                         (Amaryllis runs back to his table again, and pretends to be writing, without attending to the inkstand and several books which he oversets in his haste, whilst Dolly makes her escape by the opposite door just as Worshipton enters.) WORSHIPTON. I heard you were at home, so I made bold to enter. What, writing so composedly after all this devil of a noise?
AMARYLLIS (looking up with affected apathy). Yes, I believe the cat has been playing her gambols amongst my books.
WORSHIPTON. It may have been the cat, to be sure, for those creatures have witchcraft about them, and can do many wonderful things o' winter nights, as
[Page 202]
my old nurse used to tell me; but if you had told me it was half a dozen of dogs that made such a noise, I should scarcely have believed you. Cats too can put on what forms they please, I've been told; and tho' they generally assume that of an old woman, your's has been more civil to you, I [50]   believe, in taking the more agreeable form of a young one. I caught a glimpse of her, Amaryllis, as she fled into the other chamber.
AMARYLLIS. Poh! Dolly has been putting my books in order: is she gone?
                                         (Pretending to look round for her.) WORSHIPTON. Well, well, never mind it! I came on a little business to you, else I should have been sorry to disturb you; for I know well enough you are always employed about some sublime thing or other.
AMARYLLIS. You are too flattering.—You come upon business?
WORSHIPTON. Yes, Amaryllis, and you are so good-natured, that I shan't make any preamble about it. I want to please a lady, or make a lady believe I am pleased with her, which is the same thing, you know; and I want to borrow one of your poems that I may present it to her as written in praise of
[Page 203]
herself. However, she is not very refined in her taste, any common place thing will do.
AMARYLLIS. I am infinitely flatter'd, Mr. Worshipton, that you should apply to me for a common-place thing. Since this is the style of poetry that suits you at present, I can't help thinking you might have succeeded pretty well in writing it yourself.
WORSHIPTON. Poh, now! you don't take my meaning. I meant any little piece that has cost you little time or [75]   study, will do very well for my purpose: I should be very sorry to take one of your good ones.
AMARYLLIS. Sir, I have bestowed some time and study upon all my pieces, and should be rather unwilling to think I had any other to offer you.
WORSHIPTON. How perverse you are in misunderstanding me! The best poet that ever lived has a best and a worst poem, and I only make the humble request to have one of your least sublime ones. Do, my dear friend, look thro' your budget. Many of your works, I know, are master-pieces, and I have had a great desire for a long time to hear you read some of them, but was unwilling to disturb you of an evening.

[Page 204]
AMARYLLIS (softened). I believe I must find something for you. Will you have a love-song or a sonnet?
WORSHIPTON. Any of them will do: she does not know the one from the other.
AMARYLLIS (taking papers from his table). Here are verses addressed to Delia playing on the lute.
WORSHIPTON (taking it). This will do very well; for tho' I don't believe she plays upon the lute, it will be civil to suppose that she does, till we really know the contrary.
AMARYLLIS. You speak lightly of the lady, Worshipton, for a lover.
WORSHIPTON. [100]   I am not so refined in my ideas of these matters as you are, Amaryllis. I am a man of the world, and that character can't be supported long on a slender fortune: the lady is very rich.—But mum: not a word of this to any one.
AMARYLLIS. You may depend upon me. But you said you should like to hear me read some of my poems. I
[Page 205]
am not very busy at present; I will indulge you with pleasure.
WORSHIPTON. You are extremely obliging.—For a man pretty well received by women of the first circles, as I believe without vanity I may say of myself, it would be a silly trick to marry at all, did not my circumstances compel me to it; but I shall make such a choice of a wife as shall make me pass as much as possible for a single man still.
AMARYLLIS (impatiently). Very well!—I have a poem here which I think you will be pleased with.
WORSHIPTON. You are very good indeed.—But you see how I am circumstanced: I must have fortune.—How foolish it was in the Marchioness of Edgemore to think I was going to elope with Lady Susan! I never paid more than common attention to her in my life. It is impossible for me to marry without fortune.
AMARYLLIS (still more impatient). Well that is all very true.—But here is a pastoral [125]   which you will not, I hope, find unworthy your attention, if you will have the goodness to give it me.

[Page 206]
WORSHIPTON. You are infinitely obliging; but I am extremely sorry my time will not at present allow me so great a pleasure.
AMARYLLIS. Then I'll read you this elegy, which is shorter.
WORSHIPTON. I'm really obliged to you, but—
AMARYLLIS. Or perhaps you would like to hear my grand ode, which is in the next room. (Runs out to fetch it.)
WORSHIPTON (alone). How that man pesters one with his damned vanity. Shall I make my escape while he is gone? No, no! that would be too rude: I'll try another way of getting off.—Worshipton! Worshipton!
                                         (Calling out with a feigned voice.) Re-enter Amaryllis , with his poem in his hand. AMARYLLIS. Now, Worshipton, I'll shew you what I believe, without vanity, I may call hitting off the figurative and sublime style in poetry, pretty well.
WORSHIPTON. I beg pardon: I am extremely mortified, but I cannot possibly stay to hear it now, for Sir John
[Page 207]
waits without calling for me, and I must positively go to him. Did you not hear him call very loud?
AMARYLLIS. O, if Sir John is without we can ask him in, and he shall hear it too.
                                         (Going towards the door.) WORSHIPTON (stopping him eagerly). No, no, my good friend, not now, if you please: it is impossible: we shall hear you another time.
AMARYLLIS. [150]   I shall be at home all the evening; shall I expect you half an hour hence?
WORSHIPTON. No, not quite so soon, I thank you; we shall be engaged. But we shall have great pleasure very soon—good bye to you.
                                         (Hurrying away.) AMARYLLIS (stopping him). In an hour then, perhaps, I may expect you: I shall be at leisure all the evening.
WORSHIPTON. Really you are most exceedingly obliging, but I am afraid it will not be in our power. Excuse my haste, I am very much disappointed. (Going hastily.)
AMARYLLIS (stopping him again). Nay, surely after supper you can contrive to come to me.

[Page 208]
WORSHIPTON. O, no, no! one has enough to do then to digest the horrible eating of this diabolical inn, without surfeiting one's self—I beg pardon! without giving one's self the pleasure, I meant to say, of—excuse me! excuse me! I must not keep him waiting any longer; you heard how loud he call'd me: I am extremely disappointed indeed.
                                         (Exit, breaking from him in great haste. AMARYLLIS (looking after him angrily). Well, let him go, pitiful fellow! he is so taken up with himself and his own little paltry vanity, he has neither capacity nor taste to relish high poetry.
                                         (Exit very majestically.

END OF THE SECOND ACT.

[Page 209]
ACT III. Scene 1 A dark narrow passage-room, with the door of an adjoining chamber left open, in which are discovered Lady Goodbody, Miss Martin, and Hannah. Enter Sir John Hazelwood and Worshipton . SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. The light is gone out: let us wait here till David brings us another candle. Ha! is it fair to wait here?
                                         (Perceiving the ladies.) LADY GOODBODY (within to Miss Martin). Indeed, Mary, you ought to consider yourself as very fortunate in having the opportunity of pleasing an agreeable man.
MISS MARTIN (within). Mr. Worshipton do you mean?
WORSHIPTON (in a low voice, stealing eagerly nearer the door). They are talking of me, dear creatures; let us hear what they have to say upon this subject.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Fye, Worshipton! would you turn eve-dropper?

[Page 210]
LADY GOODBODY (within). No, you know well enough it is Sir John I mean.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (drawing also near the door). Ha! talking of me too. Well, if people will converse with their doors open, there is no help for it.
MISS MARTIN (within). How should I know who your Ladyship means by an agreeable man?
LADY GOODBODY. You may know at least who I do not mean; for that poor frivolous fine gentleman can be agreeable to nobody.
WORSHIPTON (aside to himself). Old hag! her face is as senseless and as coarse as a red-topped January turnip.
LADY GOODBODY (within). Sir John is a man that any woman might like. He is a man of fortune.
MISS MARTIN (within). [25]   So is our neighbour, Squire Numbscull.
LADY GOODBODY (within). Fye, child! Sir John is a well-made man, and—

[Page 211]
MISS MARTIN (within). And so I must like him for not being crooked.
LADY GOODBODY (within). You are both perverse and foolish. Sir John—
MISS MARTIN (within, earnestly). If you have any love for me, aunt, drop this subject for ever: the very mention of his name is distressing to me.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (in a low voice, turning from the door quickly). You need not be so vehement, fair lady: I have no intention to give you the smallest trouble.
LADY GOODBODY (within). I leave you to your own humours, Miss Martin; you have got beyond all bearing with your nonsense.
                                         (Exit into an inner chamber. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I thought her sensible, I confess; but how confoundedly pert and flippant she has become.
                                         (Aside on the front of the stage.) WORSHIPTON (going to him conceitedly). You seem disturbed, Sir John.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Not a jot! not a jot, truly! It rather amuses me.

[Page 212]
Enter David with a candle, holding his spread hand before it as if to prevent it from blowing out. DAVID. I should have brought the candle sooner, but I have but a short memory, your honour (to Sir John) , and a man with a short memory is like a—
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. No matter what he's like: go on with the light, and we'll follow thee. (Exit David, looking very foolish.) That fellow has become nauseous with his similies. (As they are going out Worshipton stops Sir John.)
WORSHIPTON. They speak again; do stop here a moment.
HANNAH (within). Would it grieve you, cousin, if my aunt were to propose Mr. Worshipton to you instead of Sir John?
MISS MARTIN (within). [50]   No, my dear, not all.
WORSHIPTON (in a low voice). You see I am in favour with the niece, Sir John, tho' the aunt gives the preference to you.
HANNAH (within). I thought as much, for he's a very pretty gentleman, isn't he?

[Page 213]
MISS MARTIN (within). He is even so.
HANNAH (within). And he dresses so pretty and new fashion'd, don't he?
MISS MARTIN (within). It is very true.
HANNAH (within). And then he talks so clever, like the fine captain that run off with Miss Money. He is as clever every bit, altho' he don't swear so much; an't he, Mary?
MISS MARTIN (within). I make no doubt of it. And had Lady Goodbody laid her snare to catch him for me, it would not have grieved me at all.
WORSHIPTON (in triumph). Do you hear that, Sir John?
HANNAH (within). It would not have grieved you at all?
MISS MARTIN (within). No, my dear; for with all these precious qualities of his, his good or bad opinion is of no consequence to me. I could bear such a creature to suppose I have designs upon him, without being uneasy about the matter. (Walking up and down disturbed,
[Page 214]
and then talking to herself.) To appear to Sir John Hazelwood as a female fortune-hunter, endeavouring [75]   to draw in a wealthy husband for her own convenience —O, it is not to be endured! To be degraded in the eyes of the very man whose good opinion I should most value—it is enough to make one distracted!
                                         (Worshipton retires behind Sir John very foolishly, who remains fixed to the spot with surprise.) HANNAH (within). Do you love Sir John?
MISS MARTIN (within). No, my dear, I am not weak enough to do that, when I know I shall never be beloved again. Could I have gained his good opinion, I should have been contented, without pretending to his heart.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (vehemently). But thou shalt have both, by this blessed hour!
MISS MARTIN (within). But now, as my aunt carries on her attack, I don't know how to maintain my credit: I shall be compelled to be downrightly rude to him.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Ay, very right, very right, my brave girl!—It is a glorious girl! I adore her for her spirit.

[Page 215]
HANNAH (within). It gets very cold: I'll shut the door now, for the smoke is all gone.
MISS MARTIN (within). What, has the door been standing open all this while?
HANNAH (within). Didn't you see me open it to let out the smoke?
MISS MARTIN (within). I am so harrassed and vexed I don't see what is before mine eyes: shut it directly.
                                         (Hannah shuts the door). SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. We are dark now, but I hear David's footsteps in the passage. Poor fellow! I have affronted him. [100]   David! friend David!
                                         (Calling.) Re-enter David with a light, looking very sour. DAVID. What do you want, sir?
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. To be lighted to our rooms, my good David.— Nay, don't look so grave, man. I spoke rather shortly to you, indeed, because I was thinking of something else at the time; but you are too wise,
[Page 216]
my good David, to mind such small trifles as these.
DAVID (with his face brightening). Lord love you, sir! I have both given and taken short words ere now: that is nothing to me. But I wish I may remember to call your honour in the morning, for as I was a saying, a man with a short memory—
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Yes, yes, let us have it all now, as we go along; and put this under your pillow to prevent you from over-sleeping yourself, my friend David.
                                         (Giving him money.) DAVID. O Lord, sir, I can't refuse any thing your honour offers me, but there is no occasion for this.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Put it in your pocket, man: there is a virtue in it.
                                         (They move on; Sir John following David, and Worshipton kicking his shins from side to side, with affected carelessness, as he goes after them. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (archly turning as he goes out). Thou'rt making a strange noise with thy feet, Worshipton.
                                         (Exeunt.
[Page 217]
SCENE II. Worshipton's chamber. Enter Worshipton , calling as he enters. WORSHIPTON. Jenkins! Jenkins!
JENKINS (without). Here, sir.
Enter Jenkins in his great coat and boots. WORSHIPTON. Are you ready to set off for this same license?
JENKINS. Yes, sir, in a moment.
WORSHIPTON. Well, make good speed then: there is no time to lose. Remember all the directions and precautions I have given you: and think as thou goest along that thou art working for thyself as well as me, for thy services shall be nobly rewarded. Thou shalt have a slice out of Sir Rowland that will fatten thee up by and by into a man of some consequence. Good speed to thee, my good Jenkins! and use thy discretion in every thing.—Hast thou bespoke music for our serenade?
JENKINS. I have found a sorry fiddler, who has got but three strings to his violin, for the fourth is supplied
[Page 218]
by a bit of pack-thread; and an old Highland piper, who has stopped here on his way from London to Lochaber; besides a bear-leader, who is going about the country with his hurdy-gurdy.
WORSHIPTON. Well, well! if they make but noise enough it will do. But the most important thing is to have the chaise in waiting behind the old mill, that while the music is dinning in the ears of the old [25]   lady and her woman, we may convey our prize to it without being suspected. Have you engaged Will in our interest? and does he say the road between this and Middleton church is now passable?
JENKINS. You may depend upon him, sir, and the road too.
WORSHIPTON. Thou art sure I may depend upon him?
JENKINS. Sure of it, sir. He will do much, he says, to serve your honour, but he'll go thro' fire and water to vex the old beldame. Lady Goodbody he means: he owes her a turn, I believe, for a half-crown she scrubbed off him when she paid him for the last stage he drove her.
WORSHIPTON. This is fortunate. Where is Sir John just now?

[Page 219]
JENKINS. With old Rycroft: he always gives him his draughts with his own hand, lest it should be neglected.
WORSHIPTON. Then I may go to the stable without danger, and have some conversation with Will myself. By the bye I have never visited that old sick devil yet; do you tell him that I enquire for him sometimes?
JENKINS. I do, sir, and Rycroft don't expect more from you.
WORSHIPTON. Very well, that is enough.—But we lose time. Here is money for thee: set off immediately.
                                         (Jenkins receives money and exit. WORSHIPTON (alone). If this succeeds now, it will be a devilish lucky [50]   turn in my fortune; for I should have found it a difficult matter to have lived much longer upon credit. (Musing a while.) I wish after all it were a less expensive thing to be a man of fashion. Gold, as the proverb says, may be bought too dear.—No, no: it can't be bought too dear by one who knows how to spend it with spirit. I shall, at least, have every thing my own way, for she is a great fool; that is one good thing we are sure of.
                                         (Exit.
[Page 220]
SCENE III. A passage or outer room. Enter SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD, looking eagerly to the opposite side of the stage. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Here comes a lady, but not the one I'm in wait for.
Enter Hannah . SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Good morning, Miss Clodpate, I hope your morning dreams have not been unpleasant: you are early up.
HANNAH. I mistook the hour when the clock struck, for it is a queer-sounding clock they have here, and don't strike at all like the one we have at home.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Good young ladies like every thing at home best.
HANNAH. Yes indeed I do, for it was made by Mr. Pendlam, the great clock-maker in London. Isn't he clock-maker to the king?
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Indeed I don't know ma'am.—But what pretty gloves you have got, Miss Clodpate; aren't they of a particular colour?

[Page 221]
HANNAH. La! do you think them pretty? My aunt says they are not pretty, but I think they are, and that was the reason why I bought them.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. And an excellent one too, madam. Pray when did you see your worthy father, Sir Rowland? I hope he enjoys as good spirits as he used to do long ago?
HANNAH. I saw him the twenty-fourth of last September, and he was very well, I thank you, sir.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. [25]   Does he never leave home now?
HANNAH. O, there is Miss Martin coming; I must go away.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. And why must you go?
HANNAH. Because my aunt says—in case you should have any thing to say to her.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. You are perfectly right to do whatever your aunt desires you.
                                         (Exit Hannah.
[Page 222]
Enter Miss Martin by the opposite side, Sir John looking at her with great satisfaction as she approaches. She curtsies slightly, continuing to pass on. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Good morning, madam.
MISS MARTIN. Good morning, sir.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Do you pass me so hastily, Miss Martin? To run away so were enough to put it into a vain person's head to believe himself dangerous.
MISS MARTIN. Perhaps then, yours is not without that idea.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Yet I ought not to be flatter'd by it neither; for women, it is said, fly from small dangers, and encounter the greater more willingly.
MISS MARTIN. Yes, Sir John, we are the reverse of the men in this respect, which accounts likewise for your detaining me here.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Nay, in this you are mistaken: it is no mean danger that proves my boldness at this moment.
(Placing himself between her and the door gayly.)
[Page 223]
MISS MARTIN. Your boldness indeed is obvious enough, whatever I may think of your courage.—But I have no particular desire to pass this way: I can find out my way to the breakfast-room by another door if [50]   you have any fancy for standing sentry at this post.
                                         (Turning to go by another door.) SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (quitting the door). And you will leave me thus scornfully. There is an old proverb I could repeat about woman's scorn.
MISS MARTIN. I know your old proverb perfectly well, Sir John; and I am obliged to you for mentioning it at present, since it sets me completely at liberty, without ill manners, to say, I am heartily tired of this parley.
                                         (Exit with affected carelessness. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Well, this is strange enough! she will charm me, I believe, with every thing that is disagreeable to me: for I dislike a gay woman, I can't endure a talking one, and these kind of snip-snap answers I detest.—But I have been too particular in my notions about these matters: I have always been too severe upon the women:—I verily believe they are better kind of creatures than I took them for.—
[Page 224]
Softly, however! I will observe her well before I declare myself.
                                         (Exit. Enter Amaryllis , with a coat in his hand, and dressed in his night-gown. AMARYLLIS (alone). What a plague is the matter with the string of my bell this morning that it won't ring! I wish my Dolly would come and brush this coat for me. (Listening.) I hear her voice coming up stairs; she'll be here immediately.—This girl becomes every day more pleasing and more necessary to [75]   me. Ever since I entered this house she has aired my linen, set my slippers by the fire in a morning (for, good soul! she heard me complain that I am troubled with a chillness in my feet), and done all those little kindly offices about me with such a native grace as beggars all refinement.—But what, indeed, are the embellishments of artful manners to the graces of simple unadorned nature?— She is at hand.—Dolly! my sweet Dolly!
                                         (Calling to her.) DOLLY (without.) Coming, sir.
AMARYLLIS. There is something of natural harmony in the very tones of her voice.

[Page 225]
DOLLY (without, in a sharp angry key). Get down to the kitchen, you vile abominable cur! Do you think I have nothing to do but mop the stairs after your dirty feet? Get down to the kitchen with you! (The howling of a dog heard without.) Yes, yes, howl away there! I'll break every bone in your skin, if you come this way again, that I will.
Enter Dolly . AMARYLLIS. Why Dolly, my good girl, this is rather an unpretty way of talking.
DOLLY. 'Tis but the dog, sir. Vile, nasty hound! he is worser than his master.
AMARYLLIS. Than his master?
DOLLY. Yes, than his master, Mr. Worshipton. His [100]   dog's tricks are like his own, for he don't care what trouble he gives to a poor servant.
AMARYLLIS. So you don't love Mr. Worshipton, Dolly? Should you have treated a dog of mine so, eh? (pinching her cheek kindly) You smile at that question, you gipsy: I know you would not.

[Page 226]
DOLLY. I should indeed have had some more regard for the brute, so as he had belonged to your honour.
AMARYLLIS. I thank you, my sweet girl, but you ought to speak gently to every thing.—And don't call me “your honour.” I don't like to hear my pretty Dolly call me so.
DOLLY. O daisy! what shall I call you then?
AMARYLLIS. Call me Sir, or Mr. Amaryllis, or when you would be very kind to me, my dear Mr. Amaryllis.
DOLLY. My dear Mr. Amarals.
AMARYLLIS. Amaryllis is my name, Dolly.
DOLLY. Yes, yes! I know your name is Amarals.
AMARYLLIS. No, child, Amaryllis.—But you'll pronounce it better by and by. And if my Dolly will take this coat and brush it for me, when she brings it to my
[Page 227]
chamber again, I have something to say to her in private which will not, I hope, be displeasing to her.
                                         (Exit, looking tenderly at her. DOLLY (alone). What can he have to say to me now? Ods [125]   dickens! I'll wager he means to buy me a new gown.—Faith! he means some other thing, perhaps. Well, if he were not so much taken up with his books, and his papers, and his poetry, and such trash, I should like mightily to keep a maid of my own, and be call'd Mrs. Amarals.—I'll bring it to this if I can. (Going out with the coat.) He shall brush his own coat then, howsomever.
                                         (Exit.

END OF THE THIRD ACT.

[Page 228]
ACT IV. SCENE I. Moon-light: a field or small court behind the inn, and every thing covered with snow. Enter Fiddler, Piper , and Hurdy-Gurdy-Man , each with his instrument. FIDDLER. How devilish cold 'tis! 'tis well we are fortified with roast beef and brandy, friend: didn't I tell you we should want it all.
                                         (To Piper.) PIPER. Very true: but you would not keep a lady of family and condition waiting till we cramm'd ourselves, Maister John.
HURDY-GURDY-MAN. Dat would be impolite in verite.
FIDDLER. Damn me! if I would play with an empty stomach to the best lady in Christendom. What the devil makes her fancy that our music will sound better in this here cold field than within doors in such a night as this? I likes to be snug myself, and I never likes to put any one to hardship.

[Page 229]
PIPER. Why thou art a good-humour'd, kindly-hearted fellow, John; I must say that for thee. But this is the true way for all love music, di na ye ken? Out among the high rocks, or under a castle-wall, man!—But now, as we are all to play thegether, as it were in a concert (taking out his snuff-box, and rapping on the lid with an air of importance), di na ye think, gentlemen, it will be expedient to enquire first, whether we can play the same tunes or not, as I suppose none of us trouble ourselves with music-books, and sick like.
FIDDLER. [25]   I can play a pretty many tunes, Piper, but none of them all goes so well on my fiddle as Ally Croaker.
PIPER. Ay, that is good enough in town to play to an orange-woman under a lamp-post, or sick like; but this is a lady of family, man, and she must have something above the vulgar.
FIDDLER. Play any thing you please, then: it will be all the same thing in my day's work whether I play one thing or another.

[Page 230]
PIPER. Day's work, man! you talk about playing on your fiddle as a cobler would do about mending of shoes. No, no! we'll do the thing decently and creditably.
HURDY-GURDY-MAN. Suppose we do give her de little chanson d'amour?
PIPER. Song a moor! what's that?
HURDY-GURDY-MAN. I do play it very pretty on my hurdy-gurdy.
PIPER. Ay, you may play it well enough, perhaps, for your Italian foreigners, or sick like, that don't know any better; but any body that has been in Lochaber, good troth! would count it no better than jargon, man.
HURDY-GURDY-MAN. But I do say when de peoples of my country hear your pipe, dey do so. (Stopping his ears, and mimicking one who runs away.) And I do say dat I [50]   play more better music dan you, one, two, ten, twenty times over.

[Page 231]
PIPER. Lord help ye, man! it's lang sin pride began: will ye compare yourself to the Laird of M c Rory's piper.
FIDDLER. A great affair to be sure of the Laird of MacRory's piper.
PIPER. You mun eat a bow o' meal before you be like him tho'.
FIDDLER. Thank God! I have more christian-like victuals to eat.
PIPER. Better than you or your grandfather either, ha' been glad o' worse fare.
FIDDLER. Yes, that may be the case in your country like enough, where, unless it be a lousy tailor, or sick like (mimicking him) , few of you taste any thing that has ever had life in it.
PIPER. Sir, an' it were not for respect to the lady yonder (pointing to the window where Hannah appears) , I
[Page 232]
would run this dirk into that nasty bulk of yours, and let out some o' the plumb-pudding you pretend to be stuffed with, you swine that you are!
FIDDLER. O never mind the lady, Master M c Rory; I'll box you for two-pence. (Putting himself in a boxing posture.)
PIPER. Done, sir, for half the money. (Putting himself in the same posture.)
HURDY-GURDY-MAN. [75]   Dese men very foolish: my hurdy-gurdy and I be but strangers in dis country: we will keep out of de way.
                                         (Retiring to a corner of the stage.) Enter Worshipton and Jenkins . WORSHIPTON. Hold, hold! what is all this for? I hired you to give us harmony and not discord, and be damn'd to you!
FIDDLER. You shall have that too, an' please your honour.
WORSHIPTON. But I want no more than I bargained for, so keep this for some other occasion, if you please.

[Page 233]
FIDDLER (giving up). Well, it don't signify, I can pick a quarrel with him another time.
PIPER (to Fiddler). Since the gentleman desires it, sir, I shall let you alone for this time; but damn you, sir, if you say a word against my country again, I'll make you a man of no country at all.
                                         (They take up their instruments, and go to different sides of the stage, still making signs of defiance to one another.) WORSHIPTON (going to the window). Are you there, my charming love?
HANNAH. Yes, I have been here some time.
WORSHIPTON. I could not come sooner.—Remember your promise; and in the mean time what music shall they play?
HANNAH. Just let them play a concert.
WORSHIPTON. A concert.—Well, gentlemen, you are desired to play a concert.

[Page 234]
FIDDLER. That is to say we are all to play together. What shall we play? (To Piper.) Shall we play the [100]   Lady's Fancy?
PIPER. A custock for the Lady's Fancy.
FIDDLER. The Soldier's Delight then?
PIPER. A—for the Soldier's Delight! a tune for a two-penny alehouse.
HURDY-GURDY-MAN. Don't mind him (to Fiddler) , he be washpish: you and I will play Ma chere Amie.
PIPER. Well, well! play what you please, both of you, but I'll play the battle of Killy Cranky, and hang me, if your “Ah Me” will be heard any more than the chirping of a cricket in the hearth.
                                         (They begin to play, and the Piper drowns them both with his noise.) WORSHIPTON (stopping his ears). Give over! give over! bless my soul! the squeaking of a hundred pigs and the sow-driver at
[Page 235]
their heels is nothing to this. (Going to the window.) Well, my love, how did you like the concert?
HANNAH (above). Very well, I thank you.
WORSHIPTON (aside). A lady of precious taste! (aside.) But would it not be better to hear them one at a time? Which of them shall I desire to play first?
                                         (Aloud.) HANNAH (above). Bid that fiddler there, without the breeches, play me a tune on his bagpipes.
PIPER. I must let you to wit, madam, that I am no fiddler, and the meanest man of all the M c Rorys would scorn to be a fiddler. My father before me was piper to the laird, and my grandfather was piper [125]   to the Highland Watch at the siege of Quibec; and if he had not piped long and well to them, madam, there wad ha' been less French blood spilt that day, let me tell you that, madam.
WORSHIPTON. My good Mr. M c Rory, she meant you no offence, I assure you she respects your grandfather very much. Do oblige us with a tune on your bagpipes.
                                         (Piper makes a profound bow, and standing by the side scene, half concealed, plays a Highland pee-bro.)
[Page 236]
WORSHIPTON (to Piper). I thank you, sir; your music is excellent: it is both martial and plaintive.—But where is our little warbler? Ha! here she comes. Enter Sally . Come, my good girl, can you sing the song I gave you!
SALLY. Yes, sir.
WORSHIPTON. Let us have it then.
SONG.

Ah, Celia, beauteous, heavenly maid!
   In pity to thy shepherd's heart,
Thus by thy fatal charms betray'd,
   The gentle balm of hope impart.

Ah! give me hope in accents sweet,
   Sweet as thy lute's melodious strain;
I'll lay my laurels at thy feet,
   And bless the hour that gave me pain. WORSHIPTON. Very well sung, indeed. (To Hannah.) Don't you think, my charming Hannah, we have had music enough?

[Page 237]
HANNAH. [150]   Just as you please: I don't care.
WORSHIPTON. I'll send them off then. (To Jenkins, who comes forward.) Take them all to the other side of the house, and make them play under Miss Martin's window. You understand.
                                         (Aside.) JENKINS. Yes, sir.
                                         (Exeunt Jenkins and music, and enter Will, who retires to a corner of the stage. WORSHIPTON (to Hannah). How did you like my song, Hanabella?
HANNAH. Very well: but la! it an't the song you promised to make upon me: it don't say one word about either you or I.
WORSHIPTON. Ay, but it does tho'; for you are Celia, and I am the shepherd, and that is the fashion of lovesongs.
HANNAH. Well, that is so droll!
WORSHIPTON. So it is.—And now, my dearest creature, fulfil
[Page 238]
your promise, and come over the window to me; the postchaise is waiting for us.
HANNAH. La! is it the yellow chaise that stands commonly in the yard?
WORSHIPTON. I can't tell you what colour it is, but it carries us off to be married. Come over the window, my love.
HANNAH. La! I didn't promise to go over the window: Aunt says they never do good who get over the window to be married: I only promised to run off with you.
WORSHIPTON. [175]   But that is just the same thing. Do come now! there is no time to be lost. You have only to set your foot upon that stone which juts out from the wall, and you are in my arms in an instant.
HANNAH. No, no! old aunt Gertrude went over the window to be married, and she fell and broke her leg, and never was married at all.
WORSHIPTON. But you can't break your leg here, the wall is so low.—Come, come, there is no time to lose.

[Page 239]
HANNAH. O no, no! I know I shall come to harm.
WORSHIPTON. Do, my dearest Hanabella, there is not the least danger.
                                         (In a coaxing tone of voice.) HANNAH. O no, no! aunt Gertrude broke her leg, and I'm sure I shall break mine too.
WORSHIPTON (losing all patience). Damn your aunt Gertrude, and all the fools of the family! I'll give you leave to cut my head off if you fall.
HANNAH. I'll go away, I won't stay here to be damned.
                                         (Whimpering, and turning from the window.) WORSHIPTON. Forgive me, my love; don't go away: I'll do any thing to please you.—What the devil shall we do?
WILL (coming forward). Don't press the lady to get over the window, sir; I'll find a way of getting her out at the door, which I shall explain to you afterwards.

[Page 240]
WORSHIPTON. But her chamber enters thro' the old lady's; so [200]   how can you get her out?
WILL. By unkenneling the old lady, to be sure; I'll do that fast enough.
WORSHIPTON (to Hannah). Then wait in your chamber, my dearest creature, till we come for you. (Aside as he goes off with Will.) What a devil of a fool it is! who could have thought she would have been so obstinate.
                                         (Exeunt. SCENE II. A small Hall, with the doors of several rooms opening into it. Enter Worshipton and Will , with a candle and burnt paper in his hand. WILL (thrusting the burnt paper under one of the doors). Now, my good Lady Charity? I'll be even with you for the half-crown you saved off me.—She'll smell the burning soon enough, I warrant ye; for your notable ladies, like her, poke their noses into every corner, and get out of bed at every little noise, to see that no rat be running off with one of their old shoes.—Do you go, please your honour,
[Page 241]
and wait at that door there, which is the only one that opens to the staircase, and I'll send the young lady to you immediately. You told her our plan?
WORSHIPTON. Yes, I returned to the window, and told her.
WILL. I have procured a trusty lad to drive in my place, and you'll find every thing as you ordered it.
WORSHIPTON. I thank you, my good fellow: I'll make your fortune for this.
WILL. I know your honour is a noble-minded gentleman.
                                         (Exit Worshipton. WILL (alone, listening at the door). Yes, yes, she smells it now: I hear her stirring. (Bawling very loud.) Fire! fire! fire! The house is on fire! Fire! fire! fire!
Enter Lady Goodbody in her night-clothes, followed by Hannah. LADY GOODBODY. Mercy on us! how strong I smell it here! Where are all the servants? Call every body up. (Exit Hannah by the staircase door.) Is that the way out? Stay, Hannah, and take me with you.

[Page 242]
WILL. Your Ladyship had better take hold of my arm, [25]   and I'll take you safe out.
LADY GOODBODY. Do take me out! do take me out! Fire! fire! fire! is there nobody coming to us? (Takes hold of Will's arm, who staggers along with her first to one side of the stage, and then to the other.) Why, what are you about, fellow? I'll get better along by myself.
WILL. Never fear! never fear! I'll warrant I'll take care of your Ladyship.
LADY GOODBODY. Why don't you go faster then? Let go my arm, I say. Is the fellow mad or drunk?
WILL. I'll take care of your Ladyship. Old ladies are often a stumbling: take good care of your feet, madam.
LADY GOODBODY. Look to your own feet, fool! and let me alone. The man's distracted! let go my arm, I say. (She struggles to get free: he keeps fast hold of her, and hobbles zig-zag over the stage, she all the while calling
[Page 243]
out fire, till they get to the staircase door, where he falls down with his body right across the door to prevent its opening, as if he were in a fit.) Heaven preserve us! the man's in a fit, and the door won't open. Who's there? Fire! fire! fire!
Enter Landlady and Dolly . LANDLADY. Fire in my house, mercy on us! how strong it smells here. O lud! lud! I'm a ruin'd woman! Where can it have broke out? O lud! lud!
DOLLY. Lack-a-daisy! I smell it over head. I'll pawn my life it is in the north garret, where my new gown lies. O dear! O dear!
LANDLADY (running distractedly about). Fire! fire! Water! water! will nobody assist [50]   a poor ruined woman? Oh, all my good furniture! Oh, my new dimity bed!
Enter Sir John Hazelwood in his night-gown. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Confound your new dimity bed! Where is Miss Martin?
LADY GOODBODY. O my child! my child! where is my child?

[Page 244]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I'll go for her.—But here she comes: all's well now; let it burn as it will. (Enter Miss Martin , and Sir John runs eagerly up to her, but stops short suddendly.) My old sick fellow is in bed, and can't stir a limb to save himself; I must carry him out in my arms.
                                         (Going hastily out, but is stopped by Amaryllis, who enters grotesquely dressed in his nightcap.) AMARYLLIS. Where are you going? where has it broke out?
LANDLADY. O lud, sir! it is broke out up stairs, and all my goods will be burnt. Who will assist a poor ruin'd woman?
AMARYLLIS. There is no fire up stairs, I assure you, but I smell it here.
LANDLADY. Then it is down stairs, and we shall all be burnt before we can get out. (They all crowd about the staircase door.) Raise that great fellow there.
LADY GOODBODY. He's in a strong hysterick fit.

[Page 245]
DOLLY. Give him a kick o' the guts, and that will cure his extericks.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. A hasty remedy, gentle maiden.
                                         (Sir John and Amaryllis lift Will neck and heels from the door.) Enter David from the staircase. DAVID. Who stopped the door there? what's all this bustle for?
LANDLADY. [75]   O, David, David! isn't there fire below stairs, David?
DAVID. Yes, as much as will roast an egg, if you blow it well.
LANDLADY. Nay, but I'm sure the house is on fire, for I dreamt this very night that Pompey's whelp was gnawing a hole in my apron, and that bodes me no good. I'll go and look all over the house. Come, Doll.
                                         (Exeunt Landlady and Dolly. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (to Amaryllis). We had better search too.
                                         (Exeunt Sir John and Amaryllis.
[Page 246]
DAVID. What's the matter with Will?
LADY GOODBODY. He's in a strong fit.
DAVID. I never knew him in one before: I'm afraid he's dead, poor fellow! What will become of old Grizel his mother now? He gave the best half of his earnings to keep her out of the workhouse.
LADY GOODBODY. Did he indeed! good young man! Run and get assistance for him. But, happen what will, old Grizel shan't go to the workhouse, for I'll take care of her myself. Haste, good David! run for the apothecary directly. (Exit David.) Go, Mary, fetch me some drops from my room. (Exit Miss Martin.) Poor young man!
WILL (getting up, and falling on his knees to Lady Goodbody). O, my good blessed lady! I'm a Jew, and a Turk, and a Judas Iscariot. I have played the [100]   knave with you all this while out of spite. If I had not been a beast I might have known that you were a main good, charitable lady.—But I'll fetch her back again: I'll run to the world's end to serve you.

[Page 247]
LADY GOODBODY. You are raving, I fear: who will you fetch back?
WILL. The great heiress, your niece, madam, who is run off to marry Mr. Worshipton, and all by my cursed contrivance too.
LADY GOODBODY. The great heiress, my niece!
WILL. Yes, my lady; your niece, Miss Clodpate: but I'll fetch her back again, tho' every bone in my skin should be broken.
LADY GOODBODY. This is strange, indeed! (Considering a while.) No, no, young man, don't go after her: she is of age, and may do as she pleases.
WILL. Ods my life, you are the best good lady alive! I'll run and tell my old mother what a lady you are.
LADY GOODBODY. Nay, I'll go and see her myself; I may be able to make her situation more comfortable, perhaps.

[Page 248]
WILL (bursting into tears). Thank you, madam! Heaven knows I thank you! but as long as I have health and these two hands, I'll take care of her who took care of me [125]   before I could take care of myself.
LADY GOODBODY. You are a good young man, I see, and I have a great mind to take care of you both. She has brought you soberly up, I hope, and taught you to read your Bible.
WILL. O Lord, madam! old Grizel can't read a word herself, but many a time she desires me to be good —and so I will: hang me if I don't read the Bible from beginning to end, hard names and altogether!
LADY GOODBODY. Come into the parlour with me: you must tell me more of this story of Mr. Worshipton and my niece.
Re-enter Miss Martin with the drops. MISS MARTIN. I sought them every where, and thought I should never—

[Page 249]
LADY GOODBODY. We don't want them now; carry them back again.
                                         (Exeunt Lady Goodbody and Will by one side, and Miss Martin by the other. SCENE III. The Inn Yard, with the stable-door in front, at which Will appears, as if ready to saddle a horse. Enter Amaryllis . AMARYLLIS. I hear, Will, you are going by Lady Goodbody's orders to desire the young couple to return to her from church: I should be much obliged to you if you would take Dorothea behind you, for she has got some business in the village this morning, and there is no conveyance for her unless you take her up.
WILL. What, our Doll do you mean?
AMARYLLIS. Yes, Will.
WILL. Hang her! let her walk: Blackberry won't carry double.
AMARYLLIS. I am sure he will, if you try him.

[Page 250]
WILL. Why should I hobble all the way with a fat wench behind me? She's able enough to walk.
AMARYLLIS. Don't be so ill-natured now: she would not be so to you if she could serve you.
WILL. No, to be sure: as far as a kick o' the guts goes to cure one of the extericks, kindly christian! she will be ready enough with her service.
AMARYLLIS. Come, come! don't be so crusty now. Here is money for you: Blackberry must carry double.
                                         (Giving him money.) WILL. Ay, to be sure, if I coax him well, I don't know but he may: for tho' he is but a brute he has as many odd humours about him as any reasonable [25]   creature.
AMARYLLIS. Do, my good fellow, and put a soft pillion under her, for the road is very rough.
WILL. Nay, hang me if I do that! she an't so delicate, good sooth!—Let her be ready to set off in ten
[Page 251]
minutes, if she means to come, for I won't wait an instant for the first madam in England. A soft pillion for her truly!
                                         (Grumbling as he goes into the stable.) AMARYLLIS (alone). He has been my rival, I see, by his spite. But no wonder! my charming girl must have many admirers.
                                         (Exit.

END OF THE FOURTH ACT.

[Page 252]
ACT V. SCENE I. The Kitchen. Landlady discovered going up and down, busy with her family affairs, and David with two countrymen, drinking a pot of beer together. FIRST MAN (drinking). My service to you, David.
DAVID (drinking). And here's to your very good health, Master Simons. But as I was a saying, if I were 'Squire Haretop, d'ye see, I would look after mine own affairs, and not let myself be eaten up by a parcel of greedy spendthrifts and wandering newsmongers. I would look after mine own affairs, d'ye see, that is what I would.
SECOND MAN. To be sure, David, it would be all the better for him, if so be that he were in the humour to think so.
DAVID. Ay, to be sure it would, Master Gubbins. For this now is what I have always said, and advised, and commented, and expounded to every body, that a man who don't look after his own affairs,
[Page 253]
is, at the best, but a silly colt that strews about his own fodder.
LANDLADY. Lord help ye, David! would any one think to hear you talk, now, that you had been once the master of this inn, and all by neglecting of your own concerns are come to be the servant at last.
DAVID (with great contempt). Does the silly woman think, because I did not mind every gill of gin, and pint of twopenny sold in the house, that I could not have managed my [25]   own concerns in a higher line? If my parents had done by me as they ought to have done, Master Simons, and had let me follow out my learning, as I was inclined to do, there is no knowing what I might have been. Ods life! I might have been a clerk to the king, or mayhap an archbishop by this time.
                                         (A knocking at the door, Landlady opens it, and enter two Farmers.) FIRST FARMER. Is Dolly within?
LANDLADY. No, she is gone a little way a-field this morning about some errands of her own.

[Page 254]
SECOND FARMER. That is a pity now, for we bring her such rare news.
LANDLADY. Lack-a-daisy! what can that be?
SECOND FARMER. Her uncle, the grazier, is dead at last; and tho' he would never allow her a penny in his lifetime, as you well know, he has died without a will, and every thing that he has comes to Dolly.
FIRST FARMER. Ay, by my faith! as good ten thousand pounds, when house and stock, and all is disposed of, as any body would wish to have the handling of.
LANDLADY. Ten thousand pounds! how some people are born to be lucky! A poor woman like me may labour all her life long, and never make the twentieth part of it. Enter Sally . Come hither, Sally: did Doll tell you where she [50]   was going this morning?
SALLY. No, but I can guess well enough; for she is all
[Page 255]
dress'd in white, and I know it is to Middleton church to be married to that there gentleman that writes all the songs and the metre.
LANDLADY. 'Tis lucky it's no worse. Step into the parlour, sirs, and I'll come to you presently. (Exeunt Farmers and Sally different ways.) What luck some people have! married to a gentleman too! fortune makes a lady of her at once.
DAVID. By my faith! and fortune has been in great want of stuff for that purpose when she could light upon nothing better than Doll. They lack'd of fish to make a dish that filled their pan with tadpoles.
LANDLADY. Don't be so spiteful, now, David; some folks must be low in this world, and others must be high.
DAVID. Yes, truly, she'll be high enough. Give some folks an inch and they'll take an ell; let fortune make her a lady, and she'll reckon herself a countess, I warrant ye.—Lord help us! I think I see her now, in all her stuff silks and her great bobbing topknots, holding up her head as grand and as grave as a cat looking out of a window.—Foh! it were enough to make a body sick.

[Page 256]
LANDLADY. Fy, David! you are as spiteful now as if somebody were taking something out of your pocket: [75]   I'll assure you she has a more genteeler behaviour than most young women in the parish: I have given her some lessons myself.
DAVID. Ay, by my faith! and her gentility smacks devilishly of the place that she got it from.
Re-enter Sally in great haste. SALLY. Lack-a-daisy! I went to the stable just now to tell Will about Dolly's great fortune; and he is gone, and Blackberry is gone, and the chaise and horses are gone.
LANDLADY. There is witchcraft about this house!—I'll pawn my life some of the gentlefolks are missing too; let us go and see.
                                         (Exeunt. SCENE II. Enter Lady Goodbody, Miss Martin , and Sir John Hazelwood . SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (speaking as he enters). I am heartily sorry for it: my nephew alone is to blame, and he will be severely punished for his
[Page 257]
fault.—You expect them to return when the ceremony is over: we shall see them soon then.
LADY GOODBODY. I dare say we shall: and in the meantime let us drop this disagreeable subject.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Forgive me, Lady Goodbody, for appearing to regret so much the honour of connecting my family with yours.
LADY GOODBODY. Indeed, Sir John, I could have wished to have received that honour from another party. Your nephew, however, sets you a good example in marrying, tho' I'm afraid it will be lost upon you.
MISS MARTIN (fretfully). Your Ladyship has teased Sir John so often upon this subject, that, if he has any spirit at all, he will certainly remain a bachelor from mere contradiction.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Yes, Miss Martin, that is a motive urged with authority by those who recommend it from experience. Nay so greatly, it is said, do young ladies delight in it, that every thing they do ought to be explained by the rule of opposition. When they
[Page 258]
frown upon us it is a smile of invitation; when they avoid us it is a signal to stand upon the watch for a tete-a-tete; (approaching her with an arch smile as she draws herself up with an affected indifference.) [25]   but when they toss back their heads at our approach, in all the studied carelessness of contempt, we may consider ourselves as at the very pinnacle of favour. Is it allowable, madam, to take this rule for my guide?
MISS MARTIN. By all means, Sir John; self-love will naturally teach you to judge by that rule which proves most for your own advantage. I hope, however, you will allow those unlucky men upon whom we bestow our smiles, to find out another for themselves.
LADY GOODBODY (to Miss Martin, displeased). You have got a sharp disagreeable way of talking of late, which is not at all becoming, child: you used to smile and look good-humoured to every body.
MISS MARTIN. And so I may again, madam, when I am with the poor silly folks who don't know how humiliating it is for them to be so treated: I hope I shall always be civil enough to spare Sir John Hazelwood that mortification.
                                         (Making him an affected and ironical curtesy.)
[Page 259]
LADY GOODBODY (peevishly). Let us have no more of this!—Sir John, I shall now give up teasing you about matrimony. I see you are incorrigible.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Then you see further than I do, madam, for I rather think it possible I may be persuaded to enter into it at last.
LADY GOODBODY. [50]   I'm sure I most earnestly wish it for your own sake; and so confident am I of your making an excellent husband, that I would even venture to recommend you to the dearest relation I have.
MISS MARTIN (aside, breaking away from them suddenly, and hurrying to the other end of the room.) At it again! I can bear this no longer.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (to Lady Goodbody). You see, madam, this conversation is interesting only to you and me: had I not then better make love to your ladyship?
LADY GOODBODY. Why there was a time, Sir John, when I was not without admirers.

[Page 260]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. How much I should have liked—but it would have been a dangerous gratification—to have seen these attractions in their full strength which are still so powerful in their decline.
LADY GOODBODY. There is still a good likeness of me, as I was in those days, which Mary now wears upon her arm: whilst I go to give some orders to my woman, make her pull off her glove and shew it to you. You'll have the sight of a very pretty hand and arm by the bye; our family is remarkable for pretty hands.
                                         (Exit. SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (going up to Miss Martin). May I presume, madam, thus authorized, to beg you will have the condescension to gratify me.
MISS MARTIN. I can't possibly: it is not on my arm at present.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Nay, but I see the mark of it through your glove: may I presume to assist you in pulling it off?
                                         (Offering to take hold of her glove, whilst she puts away his hand with great displeasure.) MISS MARTIN. [75]   You presume indeed: I can't suffer it to be pulled off.

[Page 261]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Then I must indeed be presumptuous, for positively I will see it. (Taking hold of her hand, whilst she, struggling to pull it away from him without effect, at last, in her distress, gives him with the other hand a good box on the ear, and then, bursting into tears, throws herself into the next chair, and covers her face with both her hands.) My dear Miss Martin forgive me! I fear I have behaved ungenerously to you: but believe me, careless as I may have appeared, I have beheld you with the most passionate admiration.
                                         (Kneeling at her feet.) MISS MARTIN (turning from him disdainfully). Get up, Sir John, and find out some amusement more becoming your understanding and your years.
                                         (Walks to the bottom of the stage with assumed dignity, whilst Sir John sits down much agitated on a chair on the front: she, turning round, perceives his agitation, and forgetting her displeasure, runs up to him eagerly.) MISS MARTIN. Good heaven! is it possible that you are thus affected. What is it that disturbs you so much?
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. A very foolish distress, madam, but it will not long disturb me.

[Page 262]
MISS MARTIN. I hope it will not.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Nay, it shall not, madam.—First when I beheld you, I was weak enough to think that I discovered in an assemblage of features by no means (pardon me) particularly handsome, as many worthy and agreeable qualities as would have been unpardonable in the most ardent physiognomist. I saw thro' the weak designs of your aunt, and applauded your delicacy and spirit. I will confess, that passing by the door of your apartment the other night, as it [100]   stood open, I heard you mention me to your cousin in a way that completely ensnared me. I was foolish enough to believe I had at last found a woman in whose keeping I might entrust my happiness. But it was a weakness in me: I see my folly now; and this is the last time I shall be the sport of vain capricious woman.
MISS MARTIN. Is it possible!—Oh, we have both been deceived! I have been deceived by something very far different from vanity—my wounded pride still whispering to me that I was the object of your ridicule: and you have been deceived by a physiognomy that has indeed told you untruly when it ventured to promise any thing more from me than the ordinary good qualities and disposition of my sex.—
[Page 263]
We have both been deceived; but let us part good friends: and when I am at any time inclined to be out of humour with myself, the recollection that I have been, even for a few deceitful moments, the object of your partiality, will be soothing to me.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (catching hold of her as she goes away). No, madam, we must not part. (Looking stedfastly and seriously in her face.) Can you, Miss Martin, for once lay aside the silly forms of womanship, and answer me a plain question upon which the happiness of my life depends? Does your [125]   heart indeed bear me that true regard which would make you become the willing partner of my way thro' life, tho' I promise not that it shall be a flowery path, for my temper and habits are particular.
MISS MARTIN. Indeed, Sir John, you address me in so strange a way, that I don't know what I ought to say.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Fye upon it! I expected a simple, I had almost said a manly answer, from you now. (Pauses, expecting an answer from her, whilst she remains silent and embarrassed.) No, I see it is impossible: the woman works within you still, and will not suffer you to be honest. Well, I'll try another method
[Page 264]
with you. (Taking her hand and grasping it firmly.) If you do not withdraw from me this precious hand, I shall suppose you return me the answer I desire, and retain it as my own for ever.
MISS MARTIN. Why, you have hurt it so much in that foolish struggle, that you have not left it power to withdraw itself.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Now, fye upon thee again! this is a silly and affected answer.—But let it pass: I find notwithstanding all my particular notions upon these matters, I must e'en take thee as thou art with all thy faults.
                                         (Kissing her hand devoutly.) MISS MARTIN. I think I hear Worshipton's voice.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Ah, my poor miserable bridegroom of a nephew! [150]   I must be angry with him now, and I know not at present how to be angry.
Enter Worshipton and Hannah . WORSHIPTON. My dear uncle, I crave your blessing.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I think, sir, it would become you better, in the first place, to crave my pardon.

[Page 265]
WORSHIPTON. The world makes great allowance, my good sir, for young men of fashion in my situation; knowing us to be of a free, careless, and liberal disposition, it calls us not strictly to account in matters of elopement.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. A liberal disposition! No, sir; more selfish than the miser who hides his hoarded gold in the earth. I wish you had made what is really right, and not what the world thinks allowable, the rule of your conduct.
WORSHIPTON. I shan't argue with you about conduct, Sir John: it is a devilish awkward word in a young fellow's mouth: but if you will do me the honour of visiting me in town next winter, I shall introduce you to such society and amusements as country gentlemen have not always the opportunity of knowing. You will, I doubt not, have more deference for the world when you are better acquainted with it.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. You are infinitely obliging, my most liberal sir.— And so this is all the apology you mean to offer for [175]   deceiving a young girl, and making her the victim of your frivolous and fantastical wants?

[Page 266]
WORSHIPTON. No, no! I do mean to make an apology to the old lady.—Ha! ha! ha! tho' I can't help laughing when I think how I have cheated that wonderful piece of goodness and circumspection. I must coax her a little to bring round the old fellow, my father-in-law, for I must have a brace of thousands to begin with immediately.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Yes, you are perfectly right to make as much of him as you can.
                                         (Sir John leans thoughtfully against the side scene, and Worshipton struts conceitedly up and down, whilst Miss Martin and Hannah come forward from the bottom of the stage, engaged in conversation.) HANNAH (in a busy half-whisper). So you see, my dear Mary, you must just tell my aunt that he ran away with me, and I could not help it. For, O la! he is so in love with me you can't think! And do you know we were married by such a queer-looking man: he had fifteen holes in his cassock, for I counted them all over the time of the service. And do you know, when we came to the church door, Mr. Worshipton had never a ring to put upon my finger. And do you know he borrowed an old ugly silver one of a woman who sold ballads by the gate, and gave her half-a-guinea for it, tho' it is not worth a sixpence. But
[Page 267]
I'm just as good a married woman, you know, for all that, as if it had been gold. (Holding up her finger with the ring upon it.) [200]   An't I?
MISS MARTIN. I believe it will make no great difference.
HANNAH. I thought so.—Now do speak to my aunt for me.
MISS MARTIN. I certainly will, my dear Hannah, tho' you have played so fly with us.
HANNAH. But la! don't tell her about the half guinea for the ring, for that would make her angrier than all the rest of it.—O lud! here she comes: stand before me a little bit.
                                         (Shrinking behind Miss Martin's back.) Enter Lady Goodbody . LADY GOODBODY. Well, Mr. Worshipton, what have you done with my niece?
WORSHIPTON. There she is, madam. (Hannah comes from behind backs, and makes Lady Goodbody an awkward frightened curtesy.) We are both come to beg your
[Page 268]
forgiveness, and I hope she will not suffer in your ladyship's good opinion for the honour she has conferred upon your humble servant.
LADY GOODBODY. He must be a very humble servant indeed who derives any honour from her.
WORSHIPTON. We hoped from the message you were so obliging as to send us, that we should not find you very severe.
LADY GOODBODY. I think, however, I may be allowed to express some displeasure at not being consulted in a matter so interesting to my family, without being considered as very severe.
WORSHIPTON (aside to Sir John). [225]   I only wonder she is not more angry with me. (Aloud to Lady Goodbody.) I was afraid, madam, of finding you unfavourable to my wishes, and durst not risk my happiness. But I hope you have no doubt of the honour of my intentions.
LADY GOODBODY. Certainly; I cannot doubt of their being very honourable, and very disinterested also.—I have known men mean enough and selfish enough to possess themselves by secret elopements of the fortunes
[Page 269]
of unwary girls, whilst they have had nothing to give in return but indifference or contempt. Nay, I have heard of men so base as to take advantage of the weakness of a poor girl's intellects to accomplish the ungenerous purpose. But it is impossible to ascribe any but disinterested motives to you, Mr. Worshipton, as Miss Clodpate has but a very small fortune.
WORSHIPTON (starting). What do you mean, madam? the only child of your brother, Sir Rowland: you call'd her so yourself.
LADY GOODBODY. I told you she was the only child of my brother by his wife Sophia Elmot; but disagreeable circumstances sometimes take place in the best families, which it goes against one's feelings to repeat; and there was no necessity for my telling you, in [250]   indifferent conversation, that he has married his own cook maid a year and a half ago, by whom he has two stout healthy boys.
                                         (Worshipton stands like one petrified for some time, but perceiving a smile upon Miss Martin's face, takes courage.) WORSHIPTON. Come, come! this joke won't pass upon me: I'm not so easily played upon.

[Page 270]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. It is a joke I'm afraid that will not make you merry, Worshipton.
WORSHIPTON. I'll believe nobody but Hannah herself, for she can't be in the plot, and she is too simple to deceive me. (To Hannah.) Pray, my good girl, how many brothers have you got?
HANNAH. La! only two; and one of them is called Rowland after my father, you know, and one of them little Johnny.
WORSHIPTON. O, hang little Johnny, and the whole fools of the race! I am ruined beyond redemption.
                                         (Pacing up and down, and tossing about his arms in despair.) HANNAH (going up to him). La! Mr. Worshipton, what is the matter?
MISS MARTIN (pulling her back). Don't speak to him now.
LADY GOODBODY (going up to him soothingly.) Don't be so much overcome, Mr. Worshipton; things are not so very desperate. Hannah will have
[Page 271]
five thousand pounds at her father's death: he allows her the interest of it in the meantime, and I shall add two hundred a year to it. This, joined to your pay may, I think, with prudence and economy, enable you to live together in a very snug [275]   comfortable way.
WORSHIPTON. Damn your snug comfortable ways of living! my soul abhors the idea of it. I'll pack up all I have in a napsack first, and join the wild Indians in America.—I wish I had been in the bottomless ocean ere I had come to this accursed place.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Have a little patience, Worshipton, and hear my plan for you. I'll pay your debts; you shall have the same income you had before, with more prudence perhaps to manage it well; and your wife shall live with her friends in the country.
HANNAH. No, but I'll live with mine own husband, for he knows well enough he is mine own husband.
                                         (Taking hold of Worshipton, whilst he shakes her off in disgust.) LADY GOODBODY. How can you use your wife so, Mr. Worshipton!

[Page 272]
HANNAH (whimpering). Oh! he don't love me! Oh dear me! he don't love me a bit!
WORSHIPTON. What is the creature whimpering for? I shall run distracted!
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. For God sake be more calm! If you'll promise to live prudently in town, we shall manage your lady in the country for you. But remember, Edward, the first time I hear of your old habits returning upon you, she shall be sent to London to pay you a visit.
WORSHIPTON. O dog that I am! and so this is all that I have [300]   made of my plots and my—Idiot and fool that I am!
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Consider of it, Worshipton, and consider of it well.
WORSHIPTON. I am distracted, and can consider of nothing.
Enter Amaryllis , followed by Dolly and Landlady . AMARYLLIS. I am come to pay my compliments to you, Worshipton,
[Page 273]
with all possible good will; I wish you and your fair bride joy, most cordially.
WORSHIPTON. Nay, I wish you joy, Amaryllis.
AMARYLLIS. Ha! who has been so officious as to tell you of my marriage already?
WORSHIPTON. Married!—No, faith; I gave you joy because I thought you a bachelor still. Married! what a dog you have made of yourself!—But no; your refined, your angelic Delia has favoured your wishes at last, and with such a woman, you may indeed be a married man without being miserable.
LANDLADY (to Worshipton). What did you say about Delia, sir? he is married to our Doll.
AMARYLLIS (fretfully to Landlady). Who desired you to follow me here, ma'am?
LANDLADY. It was your own wedded wife, sir, that desired me to come; and since you have chosen to marry the maid, I see no reason you have for to turn up your nose at the mistress. And you need not go for to
[Page 274]
be ashamed of her neither: she is as clever a girl as [325]   ever whirled a mop, and as honest a girl too; and that is more than can be said for many a one that carries her head higher.
WORSHIPTON (bursting into a laugh). Heaven and earth, Amaryllis! are your married to Mrs. Dolly?
AMARYLLIS. Dorothea is a very good girl, Mr. Worshipton.
WORSHIPTON. Yes, yes! I see 'tis even so. Ha! ha! ha! (laughing violently for a long time, till he is obliged to hold both his sides.) This is excellent! this is admirable! I thank thee Amaryllis! thou hast been playing the fool as well as myself. Give me thy hand, man.— Ha! ha! ha!
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (stepping forward, after having whispered some time behind backs with the Landlady). No, good nephew, moderate your laughter a little: Amaryllis has been playing the fool in a very different way from you; for he has married his bride without expecting one farthing with her, and learns on returning from church, as our good landlady has been informing me, that an uncle of hers
[Page 275]
is just dead, who has left her a very handsome for tune.
                                         (Worshipton, whose mirth stops in a moment, endeavours to resume the laugh again, but finding it wont do, retires in confusion to the bottom of the stage.) SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD (to Amaryllis and Dolly). Much happiness may you both have in your good fortune! With the woman of your choice and a competency, Amaryllis, you will be in the most favourable state of all others for courting the muses.
AMARYLLIS. Yes, Sir John; with my own slender patrimony, and the fortune my wife brings to me, I hope to [350]   make my little cot no unfavoured haunt of the fair sisters. I am not the first poet who has been caught by the artless charms of a village maid; and my wife will have as much beauty in my eyes, dress'd in her russet gown, as the—
DOLLY. But I won't wear a russet gown tho': I have money of my own, and I'll buy me silk ones.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Well said, Mrs. Amaryllis!—Gentle poet, your village maid is a woman of spirit.
AMARYLLIS. She is untaught, to be sure, and will sometimes speak unwittingly.

[Page 276]
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Never mind that, my good sir; we shall have her taught. You shall make my house your home till your cot is ready for you, where I soon hope to have a lady who will take some pains to form your charming Dorothea for her present situation.
LADY GOODBODY. So you are to have a lady then? If you had told me so before, I might have spared all my arguments upon this subject.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Indeed, madam, you might have spared them, tho' they were very good ones, I confess: the sight of this lady (taking Miss Martin's hand) made every other argument unnecessary. I hope you will give me your blessing with her. I want but this, and will not enquire of you how many brothers [375]   she has.
LADY GOODBODY. So my Mary has caught you after all. Thank God for it! She is good enough for any man, and I would rather give her to you than to any other man in the world. As for her brothers, she has but one, and he has increased instead of diminishing her fortune.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. Talk no more of these things, I hate the very name of fortune at present.

[Page 277]
LADY GOODBODY. Pardon me; but I must tell you what my nephew Robert did: It may be good for another new-made nephew of mine to listen to it. (Glancing a look to Worshipton.) He and his sister were left orphans without any provision: I bought him a commission in the army; and with the addition of fifty pounds which I sent him every year on his birth-day, as a godmother's gift, he contrived to live respectably without debt, and was esteemed by his brother officers.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. I know it well: a friend of mine had the pleasure of knowing him abroad, where he served with distinction and honour.
LADY GOODBODY. Yes, he was afterwards ordered abroad with his regiment, where he had it in his power to acquire a little money with integrity; the best part of which [400]   (three thousand pounds) he sent home to his sister immediately, that she might no longer be dependent even upon me; and it shall be paid down to you, Sir John, upon her wedding-day.
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD. No; God forbid that a country gentleman should add to his ample income the well-earn'd pittance of a soldier! I will have nothing from the young hero
[Page 278]
but the honour of being allied to him; and what advantage may accrue, by the bye, to my family, by setting so fair an example to such members of it as may not have walked altogether in his footsteps.
WORSHIPTON. Well, well, I understand you; but tell me no more of your good-boy stories at present: this cross-fated day has taught me a powerful lesson which makes every other superfluous.
                                         (Exeunt. NOTES
1

AMARYLLIS
DAVID
DOLLY
FIDDLER
FIRST FARMER
FIRST MAN
HANNAH
HOPKINS
HURDY-GURDY-MAN
JENKINS
LADY GOODBODY
LANDLADY
MISS MARTIN
PIPER
SALLY
SECOND FARMER
SECOND MAN
SIR JOHN HAZELWOOD
WILL
WORSHIPTON

Title: The country inn (1804)

Publication title: Miscellaneous Plays, By Joanna Baillie

Pages: [xix ] , 438 p.

Publication date: 1804

Publication year: 1804

Publisher/Imprint: Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees [etc. ]

Physical description: [xix ] , 438 p.

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: London

Publication subject: Literature

Source type: Book

Language of publication: English

Document type: Book, Comedy

Document note: The country inn.; Comedy.; Date first published: 1804.; Date first performed: Unknown or unacted.

Publication note: Preliminaries omitted; The following play has been taken from this source:; The Country Inn; .

Accession number: D0100056

ProQuest document ID: 2138579485

Document URL: http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/country-inn-1804/docview/2138579485/se-2?accountid=14270

Database: Literature Online

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2022 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions