____________________________________________________________

The election (1798 (volume one), 1802 (volume two), 1812 (volume three))

Author: Baillie, Joanna

Publication info: A Series Of Plays: in Which It Is Attempted To Delineate the Stronger Passions Of the Mind . 3 v. London: Printed for ... T. Cadell ... and W. Davies, 1798 (volume one), 1802 (volume two), 1812 (volume three).

http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/election-1798-volume-one-1802-two-1812-three/docview/2138579207/se-2?accountid=14270

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://temple-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/openurl/01TULI/TULI??url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;genre=book&amp;sid=ProQ:ProQ%3Aed&amp;atitle=&amp;title=The+election+%281798+%28volume+one%29%2C+1802+%28volume+two%29%2C+1812+%28volume+three%29%29&amp;issn=&amp;date=1798-01-01&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;spage=3&amp;au=Baillie%2C+Joanna&amp;isbn=&amp;jtitle=&amp;btitle=The+election+%281798+%28volume+one%29%2C+1802+%28volume+two%29%2C+1812+%28volume+three%29%29&amp;rft_id=info:eric/D0100058&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: THE ELECTION: A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS. Front matter
TO MATTHEW BAILLIE, M. D. AS AN OFFERING OF GRATITUDE AND AFFECTION FOR THE UNWEARIED ZEAL AND BROTHERLY PARTIALITY WHICH HAVE CHEERED AND SUPPORTED ME IN THE COURSE OF THIS WORK, I INSCRIBE THIS VOLUME.
[Page ]
1 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN: Baltimore , a country gentleman and the head of an old family fallen into decay.
Freeman , a great clothier, who has acquired by his own industry a very large fortune.
Truebridge , the friend of Baltimore.
Charles , an idle young man, cousin to Baltimore, and brought up in his house.
Jenkison , an attorney.
Servet , an attorney.
Bescatti , an Italian master.
David , a servant to Baltimore,
Peter , a servant to Baltimore,
Voters, Mob, Boys, Jailers, &c. &c.
WOMEN: Mrs. Baltimore .
Mrs. Freeman .
Charlotte , daughter to Freeman.
Governess .
Margery , an old servant of the Baltimore family.
Servants, Voters Wives, Mob, &c.

[Page 3]
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. The open market-place of a small country town, a croud of men, women, and children seen on the back ground; Margery and Countryman surrounded with several others are discovered talking on the front of the stage. Margery. Patron ! pot-man an' you will. As long as he holds the brown jug to their heads, they'll run after him an' he were the devil. Oh! that I should live to see the heir of the ancient family of Baltimore set aside in his own borough by a nasty, paltry, nobody-knows-who of an upstart! What right has he, forsooth! to set himself up for to oppose a noble gentleman? I remember his own aunt very well; a poor, industrious, pains-taking woman, with scarcely a pair of shoes to her feet.
Countryman. Well, well, and what does that signify, Goody? He has covered more bare feet with new shoes since he came among us, than all the noble families in the country, let his aunt wear what shoes
[Page 4]
she would: ay, and his bounty has filled more empty bellies too, though his granum might dine on a turnip, for aught I know or care about the matter.
Mar. Don't tell me about his riches, and his bounty, and what not: will all that ever make him any thing else than the son of John Freeman the weaver? I wonder to hear you talk such nonsense, Arthur Wilkins; you that can read books and understand reason: such a fellow as that is not good enough to stand cap in hand before Mr. Baltimore.
                                         (The rabble come forward huzzaing, and making a great noise, and take different sides of the stage.) Croud on F. side.) [25]   Huzza! huzza! Freeman for ever!
Mar. Yes, yes, to be sure: Freeman for ever! fat Sam the butcher for ever! black Dick the tinker for ever! any body is good enough for you, filthy rapscallions!
1st Mob on F. side.) Ay, scold away, old Margery! Freeman for ever! say I. Down with your proud, pennyless gentry! Freeman for ever!
Mar. Down with your rich would-be-gentry upstarts! Baltimore for ever! (to mob on her side) Why don't you call out, oafs?                                          (The mob on her side call out Baltimore, and the mob on the other, Freeman; but the F. side gets the better.) What, do you give it up so? you poor, spiritless nincumpoops! I would roar till I bursted first, before
[Page 5]
I would give it up so to such a low-liv'd, beggarly rabble.
2d Mob on F. side.) They lack beef and porter, Margery. That makes fellows loud and hearty, I trow. Coats of arms and old pictures wont fill a body's stomach. Come over to Freeman-hall, and we'll shew you good cheer, woman. Freeman for ever!
Mar. Ha' done with your bawling, blackimoor! what care I for your good cheer? none of your porter nor your beef for me, truly!
2d Mob on F. side.) [50]   No, Goody! mayhap, as you have been amongst the gentry all your life, you may prefer a cup of nice sage tea, or a little nice ruewater, or a leg of a roasted snipe, or a bit of a nice tripe dumplin.
Mar. Close your fool's mouth, oaf! or I'll cram a dumplin into it that you wont like the chewing of Mr. Baltimore's father kept a table like a prince, when your poor beggarly candidate's father had scarcely a potatoe in his pot. But knaves like you were not admitted within his gates to see it, indeed. Better men than you, or your master either, were not good enough to take away his dirty trenchers; and the meanest creature about his house was as well dress'd, and in as good order, as if it had been the king's court, and every day in the year had been a Sunday.
2d Mob on F. side.) So they were, Goody; I remember it very well; the very sucking pigs ran about his yard with full bottom'd wigs on, and the
[Page 6]
grey goose waddled through the dirt with a fine flounced petticoat.
Mar. Hold your fool's tongue, do! no upstart parliament-men for me! Baltimore for ever!
Croud on B. side call out) Baltimore for ever!
1st Mob on B. side.) [75]   Sour paste and tangled bobbins for weavers!
1st Mob on F. side.) Empty purses and tatter'd lace for gentlemen!
Old woman on B. side.) We'll have no strange new-comers for our member: Baltimore for me!
Old woman on F. side.) Good broth is better than good blood, say I: Freeman for me!
Little Boy on B. side.)
Weaver, weaver, flap, flap!
Grin o'er your shuttle, and rap, rap!                                          (acting the motion of a weaver.) Little Boy on F. side.)
Gentleman, gentleman, proud of a word!
Stand on your tip-toes, and bow to my lord!                                          (acting a gentleman. Mar. Go, you little devil's imp! who teaches you to blaspheme your betters?
                                         (She gives the boy a box on the ear: the mob on the other side take his part: a great uproar and confusion, and exeunt both sides fighting.)
[Page 7]
SCENE II. A walk leading through a grove to Baltimore's house, and close by it. Enter Mrs. Baltimore, as if just alighted from her carriage, followed by her Maid and Peter, carrying a box and port-folio and other things. Mrs. Balt. But what does all this distant noise and huzzaing mean? the whole town is in commotion.
Pet. It is nothing as I know of, Ma'am, but my Master and Mr. Freeman's voters fighting with one another at the alehouse doors, to shew their goodwill to the candidates, as all true hearty fellows do at an election.
Mrs. B. Yes, our member is dead suddenly; I had forgot. But who are the candidates?
Pet. My master, Madam, and Mr. Freeman.
Mrs. B. Gentlemen supported by them, you mean?
Pet. No Ma'am, I mean their own two selves, for their own two selves. But I beg pardon for naming such a man as Freeman on the same day with a gentleman like my Master.
Mrs. B. Mr. Freeman, if you please, Peter; and never let me hear you name him with disrespect in my presence. Carry those things into the house: (to the maid) and you too, Blond; I see Mr. Baltimore.
                                         (Exeunt servants. Enter Baltimore. Balt. My dear Isabella, you are welcome home; how are you after your journey?

[Page 8]
Mrs. B. Perfectly well; and very glad, even after so short an absence, to find myself at home again. [25]   But what is going on here? I have heard strange news just now: Peter tells me you are a candidate for the Borough, and Mr. Freeman is your rival. It is some blunder of his own, I suppose?
Balt. No, it is not.
Mrs. B. (stepping back in surprise, and holding up her hands.) And are you actually throwing away the last stake of your ruin'd fortune on a contested election?
Balt. I will sell every acre of land in my possession, rather than see that man sit in parliament for the borough of Westown.
Mrs. B. And why should not he as well as another? The declining fortunes of your family have long made you give up every idea of the kind for yourself: of what consequence, then, can it possibly be to you? I know very well, my dear Baltimore, it is not a pleasant thing for the representative of an old family declined in fortune, to see a rich obscure stranger buy up all the land on every side, and set himself down like a petty prince in his neighbourhood. But if he had not done it, some other most likely would; and what should we have gain'd by the change?
Balt. O! any other than himself I could have suffer'd.
Mrs. B. [50]   You amaze me. He has some disagreeable follies I confess, but he is friendly and liberal.

[Page 9]
Balt. Yes, yes, he affects patronage and public spirit: he is ostentatious to an absurdity.
Mrs. B. Well then, don't disturb yourself about it. If he is so, people will only laugh at him.
Balt. O! hang them, but they wont laugh! I have seen the day, when, if a man made himself ridiculous, the world would laugh at him. But now, by heaven, every thing that is mean, disgusting, and absurd, pleases them but so much the better! If they would but laugh at him, I should be content.
Mrs. B. My dear Baltimore! curb this strange fancy that has taken such a strong hold of your mind, and be reasonable.
Balt. I can be reasonable enough. I can see as well as you do that it is nonsense to disturb myself about this man; and when he is absent I can resolve to endure him: but whenever I see him again, there is something in his full satisfied face; in the tones of his voice; ay, in the very gait and shape of his legs, that is insufferable to me.
Mrs. B. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!
Balt. [75]   What makes you laugh, Madam?
Mrs. B. Indeed I have more cause to cry! yet I could not help laughing when you talk'd of his gait and his legs: for people, you must know, have taken it into their heads that there is a resemblance between you and him; I have, myself, in twilight, sometimes mistaken the one for the other.
Balt. It must have been in midnight, I think.
[Page 10]
People have taken it into their heads! blind idiots! I could kick my own shins if I thought they had the smallest resemblance to his.
Mrs. B. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!
Balt. And this is matter of amusement for you, Ma'am? I abhor laughing?
Mrs. B. Pray, pray forgive me! This is both ludicrous and distressing. I knew that you disliked this man from the first day he settled in your neighbourhood, and that, during two years acquaintance, your aversion has been daily encreasing; but I had no idea of the extravagant height to which it has now arrived.
Balt. Would I had sold every foot of my lands, and settled in the lone wilds of America, 'ere this man came, to be the swoln possessor of my forefathers [100]   lands; their last remaining son, now cramp'd and elbow'd round, in one small corner of their once wide and extensive domains! Oh! I shall never forget what I felt, when, with that familiar and disgusting affability, he first held out to me his damned palm, and hail'd me as a neighbour. (striding up and down the stage.) Ay, by my soul, he pretends to be affable!
Mrs. B. You feel those things too keenly.
Balt. A stock or a stone would feel it. He has opposed me in every contest, from the election of a member of parliament down to the chusing of a parish clerk; and yet, damn him! he will never give me a fair occasion of quarrelling with him, for then I should be happier. (striding up and down again.)
[Page 11]
Hang it! it was not worth a pinch of snuff to me, whether the high road went on one side of my field or the other; but only that I saw he was resolved to oppose me in it, and I would have died rather than have yielded to him.
Mrs. B. Are you sure, Baltimore, that your own behaviour has not provoked him to that opposition?
Balt. (striding up and down as he speaks.) He has extended his insolent liberalities over the whole country round. The very bantlings lisp his name [125]   as they sit on their little stools in the sun.
Mrs. B. My dear friend!
Balt. He has built two new towers to his house; and it rears up its castled head amongst the woods, as if its master were the lord and chieftain of the whole surrounding county.
Mrs. B. And has this power to offend you?
Balt. No, no, let him pile up his house to the clouds, if he will! I can bear all this patiently: it is his indelicate and nauseous civility that drives me mad. He goggles and he smiles; he draws back his full watry lip like a toad. (making a mouth of disgust.) Then he spreads out his nail-bitten fingers as he speaks—hah!
Mrs. B. And what great harm does all this do you?
Balt. What harm! it makes my very flesh creep, like the wrigglings of a horse-leech or a maggot. It is an abomination beyond all endurance!

[Page 12]
Mrs. B. The strange fancies you take in regard to every thing this poor man does, are to me astonishing.
Balt. (Stopping short, and looking fixedly on her.) Are to you astonishing! I doubt it not: I was a fool to expect that a wife so many years younger than myself would have any sympathy with my feelings.
Mrs. B. [150]   Baltimore! you wrong me, unkindly.— But his daughter comes: she will over-hear us.
Balt. What brings that affected fool here? She is always coming here. It is an excrescence from the toad's back: the sight of her is an offence to me.
                                         (Enter Charlotte, with an affected air of great delicacy.) Char. How do you do, my dear Mrs. Baltimore? I am quite charm'd to see you. (curtseys affectedly to Balt.)
Mrs. B. I thank you, my dear, you are early abroad this morning.
Char. Oh! I am almost kill'd with fatigue; but I saw your carriage at the gate, and I could not deny myself the pleasure of enquiring how you do. The heat overcomes one so much in this weather: it is enough to make one faint: it is really horrid. (speaking in a faint soft voice, and fanning herself affectedly.)
Mrs. B. It does not affect me.
Char. No! O you are not so robust I am sure.
                                         (Enter a little country girl, trailing a great piece of muslin after her.)
[Page 13]
Girl. to Char. Here, Miss; here is a piece of your petticoat that you left on the bushes, as you scrambled over the hedge to look at the bird's nest yonder.
Char. (in confusion.) O la! the briars will catch hold of one so, as one goes along. Give it me, give it me. (takes the muslin, and crams it hastily into her pocket.) [175]   This weather makes one go by the side of ditches, and amongst bushes, and any where for a little shade.
Balt. Tadpoles love ditches in all weathers.
                                         (Exit. Char. (looking after him strangely for a moment or two, and then skipping lightly up to Mrs. B. and taking her kindly by the hand.) Thank heaven he's gone! I stand more in awe of him, than my mother and my governess, and all the whole pack of masters that ever came about the house. If there was not a certain look about him now and then, that puts me in mind of my father, I should take a downright aversion to him. O! I beg pardon! I mean I should not like him very well, even tho' he is your husband. But was it not provoking in that little chit to follow me with those rags in her hand?
Mrs. B. I suppose we shall have a glove or a garter coming after you bye-and-bye.
Char. O they may bring what they please now! —Well, How d'ye do? how d'ye do? how d'ye do? (taking Mrs. B. by the hand, and skipping round her joyfully.)

[Page 14]
Mrs. B. Very well, my good little Charlotte.
Char. I am delighted to see you return'd. Ah, don't you remember how good you were to me, when I was a little urchin at Mrs. Highman's school? and how I used to stand by your side when [200]   you dress'd, and count over the pins in your pincushion?
Mrs. B. I remember it very well.
Char. But how comes it that we meet so seldom? you never come to see us now, and I dare not come to you so often as I wish, for Mr. Baltimore looks at me so sternly. Let papa and him contend with one another as they please; what have we to do with their plaguy election? O if we were but together! we could work and talk to one another all day long, and it would be so pleasant!
Mrs. B. Indeed, my dear Charlotte, I wish I could have you frequently with me; but I hope you have many pleasant employments at home.
Char. Ah, but I have not tho'. I am tired to death of music, and drawing, and Italian, and German, and geography, and astronomy, and washes to make my hands white. (shaking her head piteously.) But what does it signify fretting? I know I must be an accomplish'd woman; I know it very well.
Mrs. B. (smiling) Don't you like to be occupied?
Char. O yes: it is not that I am a lazy girl. If they would plague me no more with my masters, but give me some plain pocket-handkerchiefs to hem, I would sit upon the foot-stool all day, and sing like a linnet.

[Page 15]
Mrs. B. [225]   My dear girl, and so there must be things in this mix'd world to keep even thy careless breast from being as blithe as a linnet. But you were going home: I'll walk a little way with you.
Char. I thank you (looking off the stage.) Is not that Charles at a distance? I dare say, now, he has been a fishing, or looking after coveys of partridges, or loit'ring about the horse dealers. I hope he did not see me get over the hedge tho'.
Mrs. B. Alas poor Charles! I wish he had more useful occupations. It is a sad thing for a young man to be hanging about idle.
Char. So my papa says: and, do you know, I believe he had it in his head to get some appointment for him when this election came in the way. Shall I put him in mind of it?
Mrs. B. No no, my dear Charlotte, that must not be. Shall we walk?
Char. (scampering off.) Stop a little, pray.
                                         (Exit. Mrs. B. Where is she gone to now?
Char. (returning with something in her lap.) Only to fetch my two black kittens. I bought them from a boy, as I went along, to save them from drowning. I could not curtsey to Mr. Baltimore, you know, with kittens in my lap, so I dropp'd them [250]   slyly under the hedge as I enter'd; for this fellow with the white spot on his nose makes a noise like a little devil.
                                         (They go arm in arm to the side of the stage to go out, when Mrs. B. looking behind her, stops short.) Mrs. B. No, I must not walk farther with you
[Page 16]
just now: I see Mr. Truebridge coming this way, and I wish to speak to him. Good morning, my dear Charlotte.                                          (Exit Charlotte. Enter Truebridge. You are hurrying away very fast; I did not know you were here.
True. I have been in the library writing a letter, which I ought to have done before I left my own house. I am going from home for a few days, and I came to see Baltimore before I set out.
Mrs. B. You are always going from home. I am very sorry you are going at this time, when your presence here might have been so useful. You might have persuaded Baltimore, perhaps, to give up this foolish contest with so rich a competitor as Freeman.
True. No, it is better, perhaps, to let them fight it out. We should only have separated them, like two game cocks, who are sure to be at it again, beak and spurs, with more fury than ever.
Re-enter Baltimore. Balt. to True. You have forgot your letter. A pleasant journey to you! (gives him a letter.)
True. Farewell for a few days! I hope to learn on [275]   my return, that you have carried on this contest with temper and liberality, since you will engage in it.
Balt. Why you know, Truebridge, I am compell'd to engage in it.
True. O certainly, and by very weighty reasons too! A man may injure in a hundred different ways and provoke no hostile return; but, when added to
[Page 17]
some petty offences, he varies his voice and gesture, wears his coat and doublet, nay, picks his very teeth in a manner that is irksome to us, what mortal is there, either pagan or believer, that can refrain from setting himself in array against him?
Balt. Well well! give yourself no trouble. I'll keep my temper; I'll do every thing calmly and reasonably.
True. Do so; I sha'n't return, probably, till the poll is closed. I have told you my reasons for taking no part in the business; and let the new member be who he will, I am resolved to shake hands cordially with him. It won't do for one who has honours and pensions in view, to quarrel with great men. Good bye! to you!—Madam, all success to your wishes.
                                         (Exit. Balt. Ask favours of such a creature as Freeman! [300]   He speaks it but in jest. Yet if I did not know him to be one of the most independent men in the world, I should be tempted to believe that he too had become sophisticated.
Mrs. B. Ah do not torment yourself with suspicions! I am afraid it is a disposition that has been growing upon you of late.
Balt. No, madam; it is upon you this disposition has been growing. Whenever I am in the company of that—I will not name him—I have of late observed that your eyes are bent upon me perpetually. I hate to be look'd at when I am in that man's company.
                                         (Exeunt.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.

[Page 18]
ACT II. SCENE I. A room in Freeman's house; a table with drawings, &c. scattered upon it, in one corner, and a writing table near the front of the stage. Mrs. Freeman is discovered writing. Enter Charlotte and her Governess. Mrs. Freeman , (raising her head.) Come here, Miss Freeman: that gown sits with no grace in the world. (turning Char. round.) No, it is not at all what I intended: I shall have it taken to pieces again. (To the Gov.) Was she in the stocks this morning?
Gov. Yes, Madam.
Mrs. F. From her manner of holding her head one would scarcely believe it. Go to your drawing, and finish it if you can before Mr. Bescatti comes.
                                         (Charlotte sits down unwillingly to the drawing table; the Governess takes her work and sits by her; and Mrs. Freeman sits down again to write.) Enter Mr. Bescatti. Mrs. F. O Bescatti! you are just the very person I want. I have put a quotation from one of your Italian poets, expressive of the charms of friendship, into the letter I am writing to my dear, amiable Mrs. Sillabub; and as I know she shews all the letters she receives from her friends, I would not have
[Page 19]
a fault in it for the world. Look at it, pray! Will it do? (giving him the letter with an air of self-satisfaction.)
Bes. (shaking his head.) No, Madam; I must be free for to say, dat it won't do: de two first ords are wrong, and de two last ords are not right.
Mrs. F. (colouring and bridling up.) Why there are but four words of it altogether, Mr. Bescatti.
Bes. Yes, Madam; der you be very right; der [25]   you be under no mistake at all; der be just four ords in it, neider more nor less.
Mrs. F. Well, well, pray correct it for me! I suppose I was thinking of something else when I wrote it.
Bes. (after correcting the letter.) It is done, Madam. I hope de young lady will soon finish her drawing, dat I may have de honour to propose my little instruction.
Char. (rising from the table.) I can finish it tomorrow.
Mrs. F. Shew Mr. Bescatti your two last drawings (Char. shews him her drawings.) Every one from your country is fond of this delightful art. How do you like this piece?
Bes. It be very agreeable.
Gov. (looking over his shoulder.) O beautiful, charming! de most pretty of de world!
Mrs. F. There is such a fine glow in the colouring, so much spirit in the whole.
Bes. (tardily) Yes.

[Page 20]
Mrs. F. And so much boldness in the design.
Bes. (tardily) Yes.
Mrs. F. And the cattle in that landscape are so spirited and so correct.
Bes. O dey be de very pretty sheep, indeed.
Mrs. F. Why, those are cows, Mr. Bescatti— [50]   those are cows.
Bes. O, Madam, I make no doubt dat in reality dey are de cows, alto in appearance dey are de sheep.
Mrs. F. (shewing him another piece.) He will understand this better. The subject is so prettily imagined! a boy with an apple in his hand: such pleasing simplicity! look at those lights and shades: her master himself says it is touched with the hand of an artist.
Bes. Yes, he be a very pretty fellow—and a very happy one too: he has got one apple in his hand, and anoder in his mout.
Mrs. F. Another in his mouth! why that is the round swelling of his cheek, Mr. Bescatti. But look at this head (impatiently as he looks at the wrong one) No, no, this one.
Bes. O dat one—dat has one side of the face white and t'oder black!
Gov. O beautiful, excellent!—all dat der is of pretty—all dat der is of—of de most pretty!
Mrs. F. There is so much effect in it; so much force and distinctness.
Bes. Yes, der be good contrast; nobody will mistake de one side of de face for de oder.

[Page 21]
Enter Servant. Ser. [75]   Every thing in the next room is set out, Ma'am—Have you any orders?
Mrs. F. Don't trouble me about it: I'll look at it by and by, if I have nothing better to do. (Exit Ser.) —Miss Freeman, there is no time to lose; Bescatti and you must be busy, for I expect Mr. Tweedle this morning with a new song in his pocket.
Enter a Servant hastily. Ser. All the voters are come, Ma'am, and my master says, we must open the great room immediately.
                                         (Opens folding-doors at the bottom of the stage, and discovers a large room with a long table set out, plentifully covered with cold meats, &c. &c.) Mrs. F. What could possess the creatures to come so early? If I am to have the whole morning of it, I shall be dead before it is over. Heigh ho! here they are.
                                         (Enter a great number of voters with their wives and daughters, and Freeman shewing them in himself.) Free. (with a very affable smiling countenance.) Come in, ladies and gentlemen; come in, my very good neighbours; my wife will be proud to see you. (presents them to Mrs. Freeman, who receives them with affected condescension; whilst Charlotte draws herself up by her mother's side, and curtseys to them in the same affected manner.) —This is my very good friend Mr. Ginger, my dear; and this is worthy Mr. Fudge. —But where is your wife, Mr. Fudge? we are near
[Page 22]
neighbours, you know, and I see no reason why your good woman and mine should not be better acquainted.
Mr. Fudge. She is standing close by you, Sir.
Free. O, I beg pardon, my dear Madam! I did [100]   not know you. (to Mrs. Fudge.) —My dear, this is Mrs. Fudge. (presenting her to Mrs. F.) —But my good Mr. Hassock, why have not you brought your pretty daughter with you?
Mr. Hassock. So I have, your honour; this be she. (pointing to his daughter.)
Free. She must give me her hand: I have a girl of my own too, you see; but she does not hold up her head so well as this young lady. (More people still coming in.) Ha! welcome, my good friends! welcome, my good neighbour Huskins, and you too my good Mrs. Huskins!—Ha, Mr. Grub! you do me honour. How do the soap-works go on? you will soon be the richest man in the country, though you do spare me a morning now and then.
Mr. Grub (conceitedly.) Aye, picking up a little in my poor way, just to keep the pot boiling. (Going up to Mrs. Freeman, and wiping his face.) Madam, I make bold, as the fashion goes on them there occasions.
                                         (Gives her a salute with a good loud smack, whilst she shrinks back disconcerted, and Bescatti and the Governess shrug up their shoulders, and Charlotte skulks behind their backs frightened.) Mr. Fudge (spitting out his chew of tobacco and wiping his mouth.) As the fashion goes round, Madam—

[Page 23]
Free. (preventing him as he is going up to Mrs. F.) No, no, my good neighbours: this is too much ceremony amongst friends. Let us go into the next room, and see if there is any thing to eat: I dare say there is some cold meat and cucumber for us. Let me have the honour, Mrs. Fudge.                                          (They all go into the next room and seat themselves round the table. Re-enter Freeman in a great bustle.) [125]   More chairs and more covers, here! Thomas! Barnaby! Jenkins! (the servants run up and down carrying things across the stage. Enter more people.) Ha! welcome—welcome, my good friends! we were just looking for you. Go into the next room, and try if you can find any thing you like.
Voter. O, Sir, never fear but we shall find plenty of good victuals.
                                         (Exeunt into the next room. Manet Charlotte, who comes forward. Char. La, how I should like to be a queen, and stand in my robes, and have all the people introduced to me! for then they would kiss no more than my hand, which I should hold out so. No, no; it should be so.
                                         (stretching out her hand whilst Charles Baltimore, entering behind and overhearing her, takes and kisses it with a ludicrous bending of the knee.) Charles. And which should be kisses so?
Char. (affectedly) You are always so silly, Mr. Charles Baltimore.
Charles. Are you holding court here for all those good folks? I thought there was no harm in looking in upon you, though I do belong to the other side. (peeping.) Faith they are busy enough! mercy
[Page 24]
on us, what a clattering of trenchers!—How do you like them?
Char. Oh they are such savages! I'm sure if I had not put lavender on my pocket handkerchief, like Mama, I should have fainted away.
Charles. How can you talk of fainting with cheeks [150]   like two cabbage roses?
Char. Cabbage roses!
Charles. No, no—pest take it!—I mean the pretty, delicate damask rose.
Char. La, now you are flattering me!
Charles. I am not indeed, Charlotte! you have the prettiest— (peeping at the other room and stopping short.)
Char. (eagerly) I have the prettiest what!
Charles. Is that a venison pasty they have got yonder!
Char. Poo, never mind!—I have the prettiest what?
Charles. Yes, I mean the most beautiful (peeping again) By my faith and so it is a venison pasty, and a monstrous good smell it has!
                                         (Exit hastily into the eating room. Char. (looking after him.) What a nasty creature he is! he has no more sense than one of our pointers; he's always running after a good smell.
                                         (Exit.
[Page 25]
SCENE II. An open lane near a country town. Enter Baltimore, who passes half way across the stage, and then stopping suddenly, shrinks back. Balt. Ha, it is him!—I'll turn and go another way. (Turns hastily back again, and then stops short.) No, no, he sha'n't see me avoiding him. I'll follow Truebridge's advice, and be civil to him.— (Enter Freeman bowing with stiff civility) Good morning, Sir.
Free. And the same to you, Mr. Baltimore: how does your Lady do?
Balt. And your amiable lady, Mr. Freeman; she is a great scholar I hear.
Free. (with his face brightening up.) You are very good to say so; she does indeed know some few things pretty well; and though we are rivals for the present, why shouldn't we act liberally and speak handsomely of one another at the same time? Does Mrs. Baltimore like pine-apples as well as she used to do?
Balt. (shrinking back.) No she dislikes them very much.
Free. Don't say so now! I believe you don't like me to send them to you, but if you would just send over for them yourself when she wants them, I have mountains of them at her service.
Balt. (with a contemptuous smile.) Shall I send a [25]   tumbrel for them to-morrow morning? (Free. draws
[Page 26]
back piqued.) But you are liberal to every body, Mr. Freeman. I hope you and your friends have got over the fatigues of your morning feast? You were at it by times I hear.
Free. Yes, we have been busy in the eating and drinking way to be sure. I don't make speeches to them, and fill their heads with fine oratory; I give them from my plain stores what they like better, Mr. Baltimore.
Balt. And what you can spare better, Mr. Freeman. It is fortunate for both parties, that your stores are more applicable to the stomach than the head.
Free. It is better, at least, than flattering them up with advertisements in the newspapers, about their great dignity and antiquity, &c. I don't spend my money in feeding other people's vanity.
Balt. No, certainly, Sir; charity begins at home; and your own has, thank God! a very good appetite.
Free. Pamper'd vanity is a better thing, perhaps, than starved pride. Good morning, Sir.
                                         (Exit. Balt. (looking after him.) See how consequentially he walks now, shaking his long coat-skirts with that abominable swing! I should detest my own brother if he swung himself about after that manner.— [50]   Resemblance to him do they say! I could lock myself up in a cell, if I thought so, and belabour my own shoulders with a cat-o'-nine tails.
                                         (Enter Peter with one of his idle companions, and starts back upon seeing Baltimore.) Pet. (aside to his Com.) Pest take it! a body can never be a little comfortable in a sly way, but there
[Page 27]
is always some cross luck happens to him. Yonder is my master, and he thinks I am half a dozen miles off with a letter that he gave me to Squire Houndly. Stand before me, man; perhaps he'll go past. (skulking behind his Com.)
Balt. (seeing him.) What, you careless rascal, are you here still, when I told you the letter was of consequence to me? To have this stick broke over your head is less than you deserve: where have you been, sirrah? (Holding up his stick in a threatening manner.)
Pet. O Lord, your honour! if you should beat me like stock fish I must e'en tell you the truth: for as I past by the cat and bagpipes a little while ago, I could not help just setting my face in at the door to see what they were all about; and there I found such a jolly company of 'Squire Freeman's voters, sitting round a bowl of punch, drinking his liquors and laughing at his grandeur, and making such a mockery of it, that I could not help staying to make a little merry with them myself.
Balt. (Lowering his stick.) [75]   Art thou sure that they laugh'd at him?—In his own inn, and over his own liquor?
Pet. Ay, to be sure, your honour: what do they care for that? When he orders a hogshead of ale for them out of his own cellar, they call it a pack of lamb's wool from the wool chamber. Don't they neighbour?
                                         (tipping the wink to his companion.) Com. To be sure they do.

[Page 28]
Balt. Ha, ha, ha! ungrateful merry varlets!— Well well! get thee along and be more expeditious with my letters another time. (to himself as he goes out.) Ha, ha! a good name for his ale truly.
                                         (Exit. Pet. I wonder he did not give me a litte money now for such a story as this. Howsomever, it has saved my head from being broke.
Com. And that, I think is fully as much as it is worth. I wonder you an't ashamed to behave with so little respect to a gentleman and your own master.
Pet. Fiddle faddle with all that! do you think one gets on the blind side of a man to treat him with respect? When I first came to live with Mr. Baltimore, I must say I was woundily afraid of his honour, but I know how to manage him now well enough.
Com. [100]   I think thou dost, indeed. Who would have thought it, that had seen what a bumpkin he took thee from the plough's tail, but a twelvemonth ago, because he could not afford to hire any more fine trained servants to wait upon him?
Pet. Nay, I wa'n't such a simpleton as you took me for neither. I was once before that very intimate, in my fashion, with an old Squire of the North Country, who was in love with his grand-daughter's dairy-maid. I warrant you I know well enough how to deal with any body that has got any of them strange fancies working within them, for as great a bumpkin as you may take me to be; and if you don't see me, 'ere long time goes by, make a good
[Page 29]
penny of it too, I'll give you leave to call me a noodle. Come, away to the Blue-Posts again, and have another glass, man.
                                         (Exeunt.) SCENE III. Freeman's library fitted up expensively with fine showy books and book-cases, &c. &c. Enter Freeman and Mrs. Freeman, speaking as they enter. Free. They sh'a'nt come again, then, since it displeases you; but they all went away in such good humour, it did my heart good to see them.
Mrs. F. Oh the Goths and the Huns! I believe the smell of their nauseous tobacco will never leave my nostrils. You don't know what I have suffered to oblige you. To any body of delicacy and refinement, it was shocking. I shall be nervous and languid for a month. But I don't complain. You know I do every thing cheerfully that can promote your interest. Oh! I am quite overcome.
                                         (sits down languidly.) Free. Indeed, my dear, I know you never complain, and I am sorry I have imposed such a task upon your goodness. But the adversary gains ground upon us, and if I do not exert myself, the ancient interest of the Baltimore's—the old prejudice of family, may still carry the day.
Mrs. F. (starting up eagerly, and throwing aside her assumed languor.) That it sha'nt do if gold and activity can prevent it! Old prejudice of family! Who has a better right than yourself to serve for the borough of Westown?

[Page 30]
Free. So you say, my dear; and you are generally in the right. But I don't know; I don't feel as if I did altogether right in opposing Mr. Baltimore, in [25]   his own person, in the very spot where his family has so long presided. If he did not provoke me—
Mrs. F. What, have you not got over these scruples yet? Has not all the rancorous opposition you have met with from him, wound you up to a higher pitch than this, Mr. Freeman? It has carried you thro' with many petty struggles against his proud will already, and would you let him get the better of you now?
Free. (thoughtfully.) I could have wished to have lived in peace with him.
Mrs. Free. Yes, if he would have suffered you.
Free. Ay, indeed, if he would have suffered me. (musing for some time.) Well, it is very extraordinary this dislike which he seems to have taken to me: it is inexplicable! I came into his neighbourhood with the strongest desire to be upon good terms with, nay to be upon the most friendly and familiar footing with him; yet he very soon opposed me in every thing. (walking up and down and then stopping short.) I asked him to dine with me almost every day, just as one would ask their oldest and most intimate acquaintance; and he knew very well I expected no entertainments in return, which [50]   would have been a foolish expence in his situation, for I took care in the handsomest manner to let him understand as much.

[Page 31]
Mrs. F. Well well, never trouble your head about that now; but think how you may be revenged upon him.
Free. Tho' his fortune was reduced, and I in possession of almost all the estates of the Baltimores, of more land, indeed, than they ever possessed, I was always at pains to assure him that I respected him as much as the richest man in the county; and yet, I cannot understand it, the more friendly and familiar I was with him, the more visibly his aversion to me increased. It is past all comprehension!
Mrs. F. Don't trouble yourself about that now.
Free. I'm sure I was ready upon every occasion to offer him my very best advice; and, after the large fortune I have acquired, I may be well supposed to be no novice in many things.
Mrs. F. O he has no sense of obligations.
Free. Ay, and knowing how narrow his income is in respect to the stile of living he has been accustomed to; when company came upon him unexpectedly, have I not sent and offered him every [75]   thing in my house, even to the best wines in my cellars, which he has pettishly and absurdly refused?
Mrs. F. O he has no gratitude in him!
Free. If I had been distant, and stood upon the reserve with him, there might have been some cause. Well, it is altogether inexplicable!
Mrs. F. I'm sure it is not worth while to think so much about it.

[Page 32]
Free. Ah, but I can't help thinking! Have I not made the ground round his house, as well as my own, look like a well-weeded garden? I have cut down the old gloomy trees; and where he used to see nothing from his windows but a parcel of old knotted oaks shaking themselves in the wind, he now looks upon two hundred rood of the best hotwalls in the North of England, besides two new summer-houses and a green-house.
Mrs. F. O he has no taste!
Free. The stream which I found running thro' the woods, as shaggy and as wild as if it had been in a desert island, and the foot of man never marked upon its banks, I have straightened, and levelled, and dressed, till the sides of it are as nice as a bowling-green.
Mrs. F. He has no more taste than a savage, that's certain. However, you must allow that he [100]   wants some advantages which you possess: his wife is a woman of no refinement.
Free. I don't know what you mean by refinement: She don't sing Italian and play upon the harp, I believe; but she is a very civil, obliging, good, reasonable woman.
Mrs. F. (contemptuously.) Yes, she is a very civil, obliging, good, reasonable woman. I wonder how some mothers can neglect the education of their children so! If she had been my daughter, I should have made a very different thing of her, indeed.
Free. I doubt nothing, my dear, of your good instructions and example. But here comes Jenkison.

[Page 33]
Enter Jenkison. How, now, Jenkison? things go on prosperously I hope.
Jen. Sir, I am concerned—or, indeed, sorry— that is to say, I wish I could have the satisfaction to say that they do.
Free. What say you? sorry and satisfied? You are a smooth spoken man, Mr. Jenkison, but tell me the worst at once. I thought I had been pretty sure of it as the poll stood this morning.
Jen. It would have given me great pleasure, Sir, to have confirmed that opinion; but unfortunately for you, and unpleasantly for myself—
Free. [125]   Tut, tut, speak faster, man! What is it?
Jen. An old gentleman from Ensford, who formerly received favours from Mrs. Baltimore's father, has come many a mile across the country, out of pure good will, to vote for him, with ten or twelve distant voters at his heels; and this, I am free to confess, is a thing that was never taken into our calculation.
Free. That was very wrong tho': we should have taken every thing into our calculation. Shall I lose it, think you? I would rather lose ten thousand pounds.
Mrs. F. Yes, Mr. Freeman, that is spoken like yourself.
Jen. A smaller sum than that, I am almost sure— that is to say, I think I may have the boldness to promise, would secure it to you.
Free. How so?

[Page 34]
Jen. Mr. Baltimore, you know, has many unpleasant claims upon him.
Free. Debts, you mean: but what of that?
Jen. Only that I can venture to assure you, many of his creditors would have the greatest pleasure in life in obliging me. And when you have bought up their claims, it will be a very simple matter just to have him laid fast for a little while. The disgrace [150]   of that situation will effectually prevent the last days of the poll from preponderating in his favour. It is the easiest thing in the world.
Free. (shrinking back from him.) Is that your scheme? O fie, fie! the rudest tongued lout in the parish would have blushed to propose it.
Mrs. F. If there should be no other alternative?
Free. Let me lose it then! To be a Member of Parliament, and not an honest man! O fie, fie, fie!
                                         (walking up and down much disturbed.) Jen. To be sure—indeed it must be confessed, gentlemen have different opinions on these subjects; and I am free to confess, that I have great pleasure, upon this occasion, in submitting to your better judgment. And now, Sir, as I am sorry to be under the necessity of hurrying away from you upon an affair of some consequence to myself, will you have the goodness to indulge me with a few moments attention, just whilst I mention to you what I have done in regard to Southerndown churchyard?
Free. Well, it is my duty to attend to that. Have you ordered a handsome monument to be put
[Page 35]
up to my father's memory? Ay, to the memory of John Freeman, the weaver. They reproach me with being the son of a mechanic; but I will shew them that I am not ashamed of my origin. Ay, [175]   every soul of them shall read it if they please, “erected to his memory by his dutiful son,” &c.
Jen. Yes, Sir, I have ordered a proper stone, with a neat plain tablet of marble.
Free. A plain tablet of marble! that is not what I meant. I'll have it a large and a handsome thing, with angels, and trumpets, and death's heads upon it, and every thing that a good handsome monument ought to have. Do you think I have made a fortune like a prince to have my father's tombstone put off with a neat plain tablet?
Mrs. F. Now, my dear, you must allow me to know rather more in matters of taste than yourself, and I assure you a plain tablet is the genteelest and handsomest thing that can be put upon it.
Free. Is it?
Mrs. F. Indeed is it. And as for the inscription about his dutiful son and all that, I think it would be more respectful to have it put into Latin.
Free. Very well; if it is but handsome enough I don't care; so pray, Jenkison, write again, and desire them to put a larger tablet, and to get the Curate to make the inscription, with as much Latin in it as he can conveniently put together. I should [200]   be glad likewise, if you would write to the Vicar of Blackmorton to send me the register of my baptism:
[Page 36]
I shall want it by and by, on account of some family affairs.
Jen. I shall have the greatest pleasure in obeying your commands. Good day!
                                         (Exit. Free. Where is the state of the poll, and the list of the outstanding voters?
Mrs. F. Come to my dressing-room, and I'll shew you exactly how every thing stands. You won't surely give up your point for a little—
Free. What do you mean to say?
Mrs. F. Nothing—nothing at all.
                                         (Exeunt. SCENE III. Baltimore's house. Enter Baltimore, followed by David, and speaking as he enters. Balt. And so the crowd gave three cheers when good old Humphries tottered up to the hustings to give his vote, as he declared, for the grandson of his old benefactor, Mr. Legender Baltimore? I should have liked to have seen it.
Dav. O, your honour, they gave three such hearty cheers! and old goody Robson clapped her poor withered hands till the tears run over her eyes.
Balt. Did she so? She shall be remembered for this! I saw her little grandson running about the other day barefooted—he shall run about barefooted no longer.—And so my friends begin to wear a bolder face upon it?
Dav. Yes, Sir, they begin to look main pert upon it now.

[Page 37]
Balt. Well, David, and do thou look pert upon it too. There's something for thee. (gives him money. A noise of laughing heard without.) Who is that without? is it not Peter's voice? Ho, Peter!
Enter Peter followed by Nat. What were you laughing at there?
Pet. (with a broad grin) Only, Sir, at Squire Freeman, he, he, he! who was riding up the Back-lane, a little while ago, on his new crop-eared hunter, as [25]   fast as he could canter, with all the skirts of his coat flapping about him, for all the world like a clucking hen upon a sow's back, he, he, he!
Balt. (with his face brightening) Thou art pleasant, Peter; and what then?
Pet. When just turning the corner, your honour, as it might be so, my mother's brown calf, bless its snout! I shall love it for it as long as I live, set its face through the hedge, and said “Mow!”
Balt. (eagerly.) And he fell, did he?
Pet. O Lord, yes, your honour! into a good soft bed of all the rotten garbage of the village.
Balt. And you saw this, did you?
Pet. O yes, your honour, as plain as the nose on my face.
Balt. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! and you really saw it?
David aside to Nat. I wonder my master can demean himself so as to listen to that knave's tales: I'm sure he was proud enough once.
Balt. (still laughing.) You really saw it?
Pet. Ay, your honour, and many more than me saw it. Did'nt they Nat.?

[Page 38]
Balt. And there were a number of people to look at him too?
Pet. O! your honour, all the rag tag of the parish [50]   were grinning at him. Wa'nt they Nat.?
Balt. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! this is excellent! ha, ha, ha! He would shake himself but ruefully before them (still laughing violently.)
Pet. Ay, Sir, he shook the wet straws and the withered turnip-tops from his back. It would have done your heart good to have seen him.
Dav. Nay, you know well enough, you do, that there is nothing but a bank of dry sand in that corner (with some indignation to Pet.)
Balt. (impatiently to David.) Poo, silly fellow! it is the dirtiest nook in the village.—And he rose and shook himself, ha, ha, ha! (laughing still violently.) I did not know that thou wert such a humourous fellow, Peter. Here is money for thee to drink the brown calf's health.
Pet. Ay, your honour, for certain he shall have a noggen.
Dav. (aside) To think now that he should demean himself so!
Enter Mrs. Baltimore. Mrs. B. (aside to Balt.) Mr. Freeman is at the door: should you wish to receive him? I hurried to give you notice. Will it be disagreeable to you?
Balt. O, not at all. Let him in by all means! (to the servants) I am at home.
                                         [Exeunt servants. Mrs. B. [75]   Now, this is as it should be, my dear Baltimore. I like to see you in this good temper of mind.

[Page 39]
Balt. Say no more about that. Things go on prosperously with me at present: there is a gleam of sunshine thrown across us.
Enter Freeman and Charles Baltimore . (To Free.) Good morning, Sir: a very good morning to you.
Free. I thank you, Mr. Baltimore. You see I take, notwithstanding all that is going on between us at present, the liberty of a neighbour.
Balt. (smiling.) O, no apology, Sir! I am very glad to see you. This is a fine morning for riding on horseback, Mr. Freeman: I hope you have enjoyed it.
Free. (aside to Char.) How gracious he is! We are certainly come in a lucky moment.
Char. He is in a monstrous good humour certainly; now is the time to manage him.
                                         (aside to Free.) Free. I am much obliged to you, Sir, for this good neighbourly reception; and I flatter myself you will think I am come on a neighbourly visit too.
Balt. O certainly, Sir, but let us talk a little more this fine morning; it is really a very fine morning [100]   for riding on horseback: How does your crop-eared hunter do?
Free. Eating his oats, I dare say very contentedly. All my horses are pretty well off: I buy the best oats in the country for them, and I pay the best price for them too. They are not to be sure so well lodged as they will be. My
[Page 40]
architect has just given me in his plan for my new stables: two thousand pounds is the estimate, and I suppose I must allow him to go a little beyond it, to have every thing handsome and complete. That is my way. Will you look at the plan?
                                         (taking a plan from his pocket.) Balt. (drawing back with disgust.) I have no taste for architecture.
Free. That is a pity now, for it is really a complete thing. By the bye, are not you going to do something to the roof of your offices soon? They'll be down about you ears presently, and the longer you delay that job, the heavier it will be when it comes. (aside to Charles, on seeing Balt. bite his lips and turn away from him) What is the matter with him now?
Char. (aside) Only a little twitching at his heart: it will soon be off again.
Mrs. Balt. (aside to Balt.) For Heaven's sake [125]   don't let this discompose you; his absurdity makes me laugh.
Balt. (aside.) Does it? I did not see you laugh, Well, I am a fool to mind it thus. (going up to Free. with affected good humour.) I am glad to hear your horses are to be lodged in a manner suitable to their owner's dignity. But you are the best horseman too, as well as the best horse-master in the county, though your modesty prevents you from talking of it.
Free. O dear, Sir! I am but middling in that way.
Balt. Pray don't let your diffidence wrong you.
[Page 41]
What do you jockeys reckon the best way of managing a fiery mettled steed, when a brown calf sets his face through the hedge, and says “Mow?”
Free. Ha, ha, ha! faith you must ask your friend Mr. Saunderson that question. His crop-eared horse has thrown him in the lane a little while ago, and he has some experience in the matter. As for myself, I have the rheumatism in my arm, and I have not been on horseback for a week.
                                         (Balt. looks mortified and disappointed.) Mrs. B. (to Free.) He is not hurt, I hope?
Free. No, Madam; he mounted again and rode on.
Char. It was no fault of the horse's neither, if [150]   the goose had but known how to sit on his back. He has as good blood in him as any horse in—
Free. No, no, Charles! not now if you please. (going up frankly to Balt.) And now, Sir, that we have had our little laugh together, and it is a long time, it must be confessed, since we have had a joke together—ha, ha, ha! I like a little joke with a friend as well as any man—ha, ha, ha!
Balt. (retreating as Free. advances.) Sir.
Free. But some how you have been too ceremonious with me, Mr. Baltimore, and I'm sure I have always wish'd you to consider me as a neighbour, that would be willing to do you a kind office, or lend you or any of your family a lift at any time.
                                         (still advancing familiarly to Balt.) Balt. (still retreating.) Sir, you are very gracious.
Free. So as I said, since we have had our little
[Page 42]
joke together, I'll make no more preface about it, my good neighbour.
                                         (still advancing as Balt. retreats, till he gets him close to the wall, and then, putting out his hand to take hold of him by the buttons, Balt. shrinks to one side and put up his arm to defend himself.) Balt. (hastily) Sir, there is no button here! (recovering himself, and pointing in a stately manner to a chair.) Do me the honour, Sir, to be seated, and then I shall hear what you have to say.
Free. (offended.) No, Sir, I perceive that the shorter I make my visit here the more acceptable it will be; I shall therefore say what I have to say, [175]   upon my legs. (assuming consequence.) Sir, I have by my interest, and some small degree of influence which I believe I may boast of possessing in the country, procured the nomination of a young man, to a creditable and advantageous appointment in the East Indies. If you have no objection, I bestow it upon your relation, here, Mr. Charles Baltimore, of whom I have a very good opinion.
Balt. Sir, I am at a loss to conceive how you should take it into your head to concern yourself in the affairs of my family. If Mr. Charles Baltimore chooses to consider himself as no longer belonging to it, he may be glad of your protection.
Mrs. B. My dear Mr. Baltimore, how strangely you take up this matter! Indeed, Mr. Freeman, you are very good: and pray don't believe that we are all ungrateful.

[Page 43]
Balt. (angrily to Charles.) And you have chosen a patron, have you!
Char. I'm sure I did not think—I'm sure I should be very glad—I'm sure I don't know what to do.
Free. Good morning, Madam: I take my leave. (slightly to Balt.) Good morning.
                                         (Exit. Char. I'm sure I don't know what to do.
Mrs. B. [200]   Whatever you do, I hope you will have the civility, at least, to see that worthy man down stairs, and thank him a hundred times over for his goodness.
Char. That I will.
                                         (Exit hastily. Mrs. B. Oh, Baltimore! how could you treat any body so, that came to you with offers of kindness?
Balt. (striding up and down.) What would you have had me do? what would you have had me do, Madam? His abominable fingers were within two inches of my nose.
Mrs. B. Oh, Baltimore, Baltimore!
Balt. Leave me, Madam!                                          (Exit Mrs. B. with her handkerchief to her eyes.)                                          (He still strides up and down; then stopping suddenly to listen.) He's not gone yet! I hear his voice still! That fool, with some cursed nonsence or other, is detaining him still in the hall! It is past all endurance! Who waits there? Enter Peter. What, dost thou dare to appear before me with that serpent's tongue of thine, sloughed over with
[Page 44]
lies? You dare to bring your stories to me, do you? (shaking him violently by the collar.)
Pet. Oh! mercy, mercy, your honour! I'm sure it was no fault of mine that it was not 'Squire Freeman that fell. I'm sure I did all I could to make it him.
Balt. [225]   Do what thou can'st now, then, to save thy knave's head from the wall.
                                         (throwing Peter violently from him, after shaking him well; and exit into an inner room, flapping the door behind him with great force.) Pet. (after looking ruefully and scratching his head for some time.) Well, I sees plainly enough that a body who tells lies should look two or three ways on every side of him before he begins.
                                         (Exit very ruefully.)

END OF THE SECOND ACT.

[Page 45]
ACT III. SCENE I. Mrs. Baltimore's dressing-room. She is discovered sitting by a table, looking over papers. Mrs. Baltimore . Well , I have the satisfaction to find that my personal expences, for this last year, have been very moderate; but I am resolved they shall be still more contracted. Though ruin, I fear, cannot be averted, yet, when it does come, I can lift up my unblushing head, and say “this is no work of mine.” No foolish debts of my contracting, Baltimore, shall add to the number of those claims that already so gallingly press upon your proud and irritable mind; and which, perhaps, will, in the end, drive you from the long and fondly retained habitation of your forefathers.
                                         (leans pensively upon her arm for some time, then continues to look over more papers.) Enter Charles, with a slow sauntering step. Char. Let me see what o'clock it is now. What says my watch to it now? (looking at his watch) Pest take it! it is but ten minutes since I look'd last; and I could have sworn it was as good three quarters, or, at least, half an hour, as ever clock tick'd, or ever sand-glass ran. (yawning and stretching himself.) Ah! I find it has been but half an hour of a
[Page 46]
weary man's reckoning, who still sees two long long periods ycleped hours, lying between him and his dinner, like a dreary length of desert waste before the promised land. (yawning and stretching again.) My fishing tackle is all broke and destroyed, and [25]   Squire Sapling has borrowed my pointer. I have sat shaking my legs upon the corn-chest, till every horse in the stable is rubbed down, and the groom, happy dog! has gone with his broom in his hand, to sweep out the yard and the kennel. O dear! O dear! O dear! What shall I do?
Mrs. B. (rising from the table.) Poor man! I pity you with all my heart; but I do think I could contrive to find employment for you, if you are inclined to it.
Char. Yes, Yes! I am inclined to it! Idleness is tiresome enough, God wot! I am inclined to it, be what it will. But what is it tho'? Have you any skanes of thread to wind?
Mrs. B. No, something better than that, Charles.
Char. What, card boxes to paste?
Mrs. B. Something better than that too.
Char. Poetry or advertisements to cut out of the news-paper?
Mrs. B. No, no, something better than all these.
Char. (eagerly.) It is some new employment then.
Mrs. B. Yes, Charles, a very new one indeed. What would you think of taking up a book and [50]   reading an hour before dinner?

[Page 47]
Char. (disappointed.) Pshaw! is that your fine employment? I thought I was really to have something to do. I'll e'en go to the village again, and hear stories from old Margery, about the election and the old family grandeur of the Baltimores.
Mrs. B. Nay, don't put such an affront upon my recommendation. Do take up this book, and try, for once in your life, what kind of a thing reading quietly for an hour to one's self may be. I assure you there are many good stories in it, and you will get some little insight into the affairs of mankind, by the bye.
Char. No, no; no story read, can ever be like a story told by a pair of moving lips, and their two lively assistants the eyes, looking it to you all the while, and supplying every deficiency of words.
Mrs. B. But try it, only try it. You can't surely be so ungallant as to refuse me.
                                         (Gives him a book.) Char. Well then, since it must be so, shew me where to begin. Some people, when they open a book, can just pop upon a good thing at once, and be diverted with it; but I don't know how it is, whenever I open a book, I can light upon nothing but long dry prefaces and dissertations; beyond [75]   which, perhaps, there may lie, at last, some pleasant story, like a little picture closet, at the end of a long stone gallery, or like a little kernel, buried in a great mountain of shells and of husks. I would not take the trouble of coming at it, for all that one gets.

[Page 48]
Mrs. B. You shall have no trouble at all. There is the place to begin at. Sit down, then, and make no more objections.
                                         (points out the place, and retrns to her papers again.)                                          (Charles sits down with his book: reads a little with one arm dangling over the back of the chair; then changes his position, and reads a little while with the other arm over the back of the chair; then changes his position again, and, after rubbing his legs with his book hand, continues to read a little more; then he stops, and brushes some dust off his breeches with his elbow.) Mrs. B. (observing him, and smiling.) How does the reading go on?
Char. Oh, pretty well; I shall finish the page presently. (he reads a little longer, still fidgeting about, and then starting up from his seat.) By the bye, that hound of a shoemaker has forgot to send home my new boots. I must go and see after them.
Mrs. B. What could possibly bring your boots into your mind at this time, I wonder?
Char. It is no wonder at all; for whenever I begin to read, and that is not often, I confess, all the little odd things that have slipp'd out of my head for a month, are sure to come into it then. I must see after the boots tho'.
Mrs. B. Not just now.
Char. [100]   This very moment. There is no time to be lost. I must have them to-morrow at all events.
[Page 49]
Good bye to you. (looking to the window, as he passes on towards the door.) Ha! there comes a visitor for you.
Mrs. B. Who is it?
Char. It is Charlotte Freeman, walking very demurely, because she is within sight of the windows.
Mrs. B. I am sorry she is come. I have desired the servants to say I am from home. It is unpleasant to Mr. Baltimore to see any part of that family, and I have promised—no, no, I have—you must go to enquire after your boots, you say. (a gentle tap at the door.) come in.
Enter Charlotte. Charl. (going up affectionately to Mrs. B.) I thought you would let me in. (curtseys affectedly to Charles.)
Mrs. B. Did the servants—
Charl. I saw no servants at all. I stole in by the little door of the shrubbery; for I did not like to go in by the great gate, lest I should meet Mr. Baltimore; and he always looks so strangely at me—But I beg pardon: I see I hurt you by saying so.
Mrs. B. Have you walk'd far this morning?
Charl. Only so far to see you; for you seem'd unwell when I saw you last, and I could not be happy [125]   'till I inquired after you.
Mrs. B. You are very good, my dear Charlotte, I am very well.
Charl. (observing her embarrass'd.) I fear I come unseasonably.
Char. O, no! We were just wishing for some good girl to come to us; and when you go home again, I shall have the honour of attending you.

[Page 50]
Charl. (affectedly.) No, I thank you, there is no occasion; I know my way very well.
Char. But I can shew you a better way, where there are fine sloes and blackberries on the hedges, if you have a mind to gather any. Eating such sweet fruit puts people into good humour, and cures them of affectation.
Charl. (disdainfully.) I don't know what you mean, Sir, by your sloes and your blackberries, but I suppose you want to shew me the place where you cropt your black puppy's ears the other day, and had your fingers well bit for your pains. I wonder whether you or the puppy were in the best humour upon that occasion.
Char. Faith, the puppy and I were very much the better for a piece of your flounced furbelow, which we found upon the hedge, to bind up our [150]   wounds for us. For you have a great sense of justice, Miss Freeman; you never take any thing off the bushes, without leaving something in return.
Charl. And you, too, Mr. Charles, are a gentleman of great honesty; for you would not take a bit of the poor dog's ears off, without leaving a bit of your own fingers in his mouth as an equivalent.
Mrs. B. How comes it that you two are always quarrelling, and yet always coming in one another's way? (to Char.) You forget: you must go and see after your boots.
Char. O! I can go to-morrow morning.
Mrs. B. But there is not a moment to be lost: you must have them at all events, you know. No,
[Page 51]
no; no lingering here: it is an errand of necessity. (pointing to the door.)
                                         (Exit Char. unwillingly.) Charl. I'm glad you have sent him away, he is so forward and so troublesome. Perhaps I am a little so myself just now. If I am, don't make any ceremony of sending me off: for I see, my dear Mrs. Baltimore, your spirits are not so good as they used to be. O! if I could do any thing to cheer them!
                                         (Looking wistfully at her.) Mrs. B. I thank you, my good girl! you are not at all troublesome: you are very pleasant to me; and if it depended upon myself, I should like that [175]   we were often together.
Charl. (taking her hand warmly.) Should you? Well, and if it depended upon me, I should be always with you. I should go wherever you went, and do whatever you did; and wear the same caps and gowns that you wear, and look just as like you as I could. It is a sad thing that I can get to you so seldom, with those eternal lessons at home, and Mr. Baltimore's stern looks, which almost frighten me when I come here. Do you know I have often thought of writing to you, but then I don't know what to say. It is strange, now! I know ladies, who love one another, write such long letters to one another every day, and yet I don't know what to say.
Mrs. B. And I have known, my dear Charlotte, ladies who did not love one another, do just the same thing.

[Page 52]
Charl. Have you, indeed? La, that is wonderful! But don't you very often write long letters to the friends you love most?
Mrs. B. Indeed I don't write very often, nor very long letters to any body; and yet I have some friends whom I very dearly love.
Charl. (taking Mrs. B's. hand and skipping about her.) O! I am so glad to hear that! I thought all [200]   dear friends wrote to one another every day, and that every body knew what to say but myself.— When I am with Mama, I think it will be so difficult to become amiable and accomplished, as I ought to be, that I am quite discouraged; but when I am with you, it appears so pleasant and so easy, that I am put quite into good spirits again.— But, no, no! I do every thing so clumsily! and you do every thing so well!
Mrs. B. Don't be so diffident of yourself, Charlotte: remember you are but fifteen, and I am four-and-twenty.
Charl. I wonder how I shall look when I am four-and-twenty. I'm sure, notwithstanding all the pains both Mama and my Governess take with me, I don't think I look very well at present.
Mrs. B. Nay, my good Charlotte, you look very well always, when you don't attempt to look too well. I hope to see you turn out a very agreeable woman.
Charl. Do you think so? I am to go to public places with Mama next winter; and I have overheard her and my Governess whispering together
[Page 53]
as if I should have admirers coming about me then. But I don't think I shall. Do you think so?
Mrs. B. (smiling.) Indeed, I can't say: perhaps [225]   you may, and it is possible you may not; but the less you think of them, the more you will probably have.
Charl. I'm sure I think very little about them. And yet I can't help fancying to myself sometimes, how I shall behave to them.
Mrs. B. Ah! that is but a poor way of employing your fancy. Don't think too much about admirers: they won't admire you the more for that.
Charl. But I won't let them know that I think about them.
Mrs. B. But they will find it out.
Charl. Ha! but I will hold myself very high indeed, and not seem to care a farthing for one of them.
Mrs. B. But they will find it out nevertheless.
Charl. I'm sure I have heard that the young men now-a'-days are no great conjurers.
Mrs. B. That may be very true; but they are all conjurers enough to find that out, though better things should escape their penetration.
Mrs. B. (with some alarm.) I hear Mr. Baltimore coming.
Charl. You seem uneasy. Will he be angry to find me here?
Mrs. B. (much embarrassed.) [250]   He will be surprised, perhaps; but he won't come here—he is only passing to the library, I hope.

[Page 54]
Charl. Ha! but he is coming though! (creeping behind Mrs. B.) He is just at the door. I will hide myself behind the open door of this cabinet, and do you stand before me till he goes away.
                                         (She skulks behind the door of an open cabinet, and Mrs. B. stands up close by her to conceal her completely.) Enter Baltimore. Balt. The tide is running against me again; and even my own old servants, I have learnt, at this moment, are swilling themselves at the Cat and Bagpipes, with the damn'd ale and roast-beef of mine adversary. I am going to my attorney immediately; if any person on business should call in my absence, detain him till I return.
Mrs. B. Certainly. I wish you a pleasant ride. I think I shall take a little ramble presently, but shall leave your orders with the servants.
Balt. No, don't go out just now, I beg it of you. That little affected jade of Freeman's is prowling about; and I have already confessed to you, that it disturbs me to see you together.
Mrs. B. Ah! you are prejudiced: you talk without knowing her. She is a sweet tempered, kind hearted girl, and nature meant her for something very different from what she appears to be.
                                         (Charlotte behind, catches hold of Mrs. B's hand and kisses it.) Balt. [275]   Yes, nature meant her for a clumsy—
Mrs. B. Pray don't delay going to your attorney!

[Page 55]
Balt. A clumsy hoiden only; and, under the tuition of her ridiculous mother, she assumes all the delicate airs of a fine lady.
Mrs. B. Well, well, go to your attorney: it is all very harmless.
Balt. Well, well, it is all very harmless, if you will; and I have laughed at a thousand little affected fools, nearly as absurd as herself. But when I see those broad features of her father, stamped so strongly by nature upon her common-place countenance, pretending to wear the conscious importance of superior refinement, it provokes me beyond all patience that you should be so intimate with her.
Mrs. B. She is a girl that will very much improve by any reasonable intimacy, and will very soon become like the people she is with.
Balt. Very well, let her be as little with you, then, and as much with her own foolish absurd mother as possible; and the more ridiculous they both are, the greater pleasure I shall have in seeing them any where but in your company. I assure you I have no wish to reform them. It is one of [300]   the few consolations I receive in my intercourse with this man, to see him connected with such a couple of fools.
Mrs. B. O Baltimore! for heaven's sake stay no longer here!
Balt. Pray what is the meaning of this? are you in your senses?

[Page 56]
Mrs. B. Scarcely, indeed, while you remain here, and talk thus.
Balt. What, does it affect you to this pitch, then? Are you attached to that girl?
Mrs. B. Indeed I am.
                                         (Charl. behind, catches Mrs. B's hand again, and kisses it very gratefully.) Balt. Well, Madam; I see plainly enough the extent of your attachment to me. (walking up and down vehemently.) Methinks it should have been offensive to you even to have stroked the very ears of his dog. And that excrescence, that wart, that tadpole, that worm from the adder's nest which I abhor.
Mrs. B. For heaven's sake go away! you kill, you distract me!
Balt. Yes, yes, Madam; I see plainly enough I am married to a woman who takes no common interest, who owns no sympathy with my feelings.
                                         (He turns upon his heel in anger to go away, whilst Charlotte springs from her hiding place, and slipping softly after him, makes a motion with her foot as if she would give him a kick in the going out; upon which Balt. turns suddenly round and sees her. She stops short quite confounded: and he, glancing a look of indignation at his wife, fixes his eyes sternly upon Charlotte, who, recoiling from him step by step as he sternly frowns upon her, throws herself at last upon Mrs. B's neck, and bursts into tears. Balt. then turns upon his heel angrily and exit.) Charl. (sobbing.) I shall never be able to look up again as long as I live. There never was any body
[Page 57]
[325]   like me; for, always when I wish to behave best, something or other comes across me and I expose myself. I shall be so scorn'd and laught at!—I'll never enter this house any more—Oh! oh! oh! Some devil put it into my head, and I could not help it. I'll go home again, and never come a visiting any more.—Oh! oh! oh! I am so disgraced!
Mrs. B. Be comforted, my dear Charlotte! It was but a girl's freak, and nobody shall know any thing of it. But, indeed, you had better go home.
Charl. Yes, I'll go home and never return here any more. But, oh, my dear Mrs. Baltimore, don't despise me!
Mrs. B. No, my dear girl, I love you as much as ever.
Charl. Do you indeed. And yet I must not come to you again. O, I shall wander every morning on the side of the little stream that divides your grounds from ours; and if I could but see you sometimes on the opposite side, calling over to me, I should be happy! It is so good in you to say that you love me; for I shall never love myself any more.
                                         (Exeunt Mrs. B. soothing and comforting Charl. as they go off.) SCENE II. A small anti-room in Freeman's house. Enter Mrs. Freeman with letters in her hand. Mrs. Free. (holding out her letters.) Pretty well, I think, for one day's post. I should write to my dear Mrs. Languish too, if my extracts from Petrach were ready.

[Page 58]
Enter Governess in great haste. Gov. O dear, Madame! I don't know what ting I shall do wit Miss Freeman.
Mrs. Free. What is the matter?
Gov. She come in, since a very little time from her walk, and I believe she be to see Madame Baltimore too, as drooping and as much out of spirit as a pair of ruffles wid de starch out of dem; and she sit down so (imitating her.) quite frompish, and won't read her lesson to me, though I speak all de good words to her dat I can.
Mrs. Free. Well, go to her again, and I'll follow you immediately, and speak to her myself.
                                         (Exit Governess.                                          (Mrs. Free. after putting up her letters very leisurely, and looking at one or two of them, goes out.) SCENE III. Charlotte is discovered sitting in a disconsolate posture, on a low stool in the middle of the room; the Governess standing by her, endeavouring to soothe and coax her, whilst she hitches away from her fretfully, pushing her stool towards the front of the stage every time the Governess attempts to soothe her. Gov. Do be de good young lady, now, and read over your lesson.
Charl. Can't you let me alone for a moment? I'm not in a humour just now.
Gov. You be in de humours, but in de bad humours, I see. I will put you in de good humours.
[Page 59]
Look here! Fal, lal, de laddy, daddy (singing fantastically.) Why don't you smile, Miss? You love dat air, don't you?
                                         (putting her hand soothingly on Charlotte's shoulder, and grinning in her face.) Charl. (shaking off her hand impatiently, turning her back to her, and sitting on the other side of the stool.) I don't like it a bit.
Gov. O, but you do! And den de pretty steps I shew'd you: if you would read your lesson, now, we should dance dem togeder. (singing and dancing some French steps fantastically.) Why don't you look at me? Don't it amuse you, Miss?
Charl. What amusement is it to me, do you think, to see a pair of old fringed shoes clattering upon the boards?
Gov. (shrugging her shoulders.) Mon Dieu! she has no taste for any of de elegancies (putting her hand upon Charlottes's shoulder coaxingly.) But if you don't speak well de French and write well de French, de pretty fine gentlemans won't admire you.
Charl. (shaking off her hand again, and turning from her to sit on the other side of the stool.) [25]   And what do I care for de pretty fine gentlemans, or de pretty fine ladies either? I wish there was not such a thing in the world as either of them.
Gov. (casting up her eyes.) Mon Dieu! She wish us all out of de world.
Charl. I'm sure I should live an easier life than I do, if there was not—

[Page 60]
Enter Mrs. Freeman. Mrs. Free. What freak is this you have taken into your head, Miss Freeman, not to read with Ma'moiselle. It won't do, I assure you, to follow your own whimsies thus. You must study regularly and diligently, if you would ever become an elegant and accomplished woman.
Charl. I'm sure I shall never become either elegant or accomplished. Why need I scrawl versions eternally, and drum upon the piano-forte, and draw frightful figures till my fingers ache, and make my very life irksome to me, when I know very well I shall never be better than a poor heedless creature, constantly forgetting and exposing myself, after all? I know very well I shall never be either elegant or accomplished.
Mrs. Free. Why should you suppose so? there is no merit in being too diffident.
Gov. [50]   You should not tink so poor of yourself, Miss. You come on very well. Several lady say dat you are become so like to me in all de airs, and de grace, and de manners, dat you are quite odder ting dan you were.
Charl. No wonder, then, that they laugh at me.
Gov. (casting up her eyes.) Mon Dieu! She is mad! shall I shut her up in her chamber?
Mrs. Free. Stop a little, if you please: she does not speak altogether from the purpose neither. Come, come, Miss Freeman: rouse yourself up, and have some laudable ambition: the distinction of elegant accomplishments is not to be obtained without industry and attention.

[Page 61]
Charl. I wish I were with some of the wild people that run in the woods, and know nothing about accomplishments! I know I shall be a blundering creature all my life, getting into scrapes that no body else gets into; I know I shall. Why need I study my carriage, and pin back my shoulders, and hamper myself all day long, only to be laughed at after all?
Mrs. Free. I don't know what you may meet with when you chuse to visit by yourself, Miss Freeman, but in my company, at least, you may be [75]   satisfied upon that score.
Charl. And what satisfaction will it be to me that we are ridiculous together? I would rather be laughed at alone than have people laughing at us both, as they do.
Mrs. Free. (with amazement.) The creature is beside herself in good earnest! What do you mean child? Who have you been with? Who has put these things into your head? If Mrs. Baltimore can find no better conversation for you than this kind of insolent impertinence, she is poorly employed indeed.
Charl. It was not Mrs. Baltimore that said so.
Mrs. Free. Who said so then? somebody has, I find.
Charl. It was Mr. Baltimore.
Mrs. Free. And you had the meanness to suffer such words in your presence?
Charl. It was not in my presence neither, for he did not see me.

[Page 62]
Mrs. Free. And where was you then?
Charl. Just behind the train of Mrs. Baltimore's gown, till he should go out again.
Mrs. Free. And so you sneaked quietly in your hiding-place, and heard all this insolent abuse? Mean creature! a girl of any spirit would have [100]   rushed out upon him with indignation.
Charl. And so I did rush out.
Mrs. Free. And what did you say to him?
Charl. (sillily) I did not say any thing.
Mrs. Free. I hope you resented it, then, by the silent dignity of your behaviour.
Charl. (much embarrassed.) I'm sure I don't know —I did but give him a little make-believe kick with my slipper, as he went out at the door, when he turned round of a sudden, with a pair of terrible eyes staring upon me like the Great Mogul.
Mrs. Free. A make-believe kick! what do you mean by that?
Charl. La! just a little kick on—on—
Mrs. Free. On what, child?
Charl. La! just upon his coat behind as he went out at the door.
Mrs. F. And did you do that? Oh! it is enough to make one mad! You are just fit to live with the Indians, indeed, or the wild Negroes, or the Hottentots! To disgrace yourself thus, after all the pains I have taken with you! It is enough to drive one mad! Go to your own room directly, and get sixteen pages of blank verse by
[Page 63]
rote. But I'm sure you are fitter company for the [125]   pigs than the poets.
Charl. How was I to know that he had eyes in the back of his neck, and could know what was doing behind him?
Mrs. Free. He shall have eyes upon all sides of his head if he escape from my vengeance. It shall cost him his election, let it cost me what it will. (rings the bell violently.) Who waits there? (enter a servant.) Order the chariot to he got ready immediately. (exit servant.) I will go to Mr. Jenkison directly. He has already pointed out the means; and I shall find money, without Mr. Freeman's knowing any thing of the matter, to manage it all, well enough.
Charl. La! I'm sure I knew well enough I did wrong; but I did not think of all this uproar about it.
Mrs. Free. Go to your own room, child: I can't abide the sight of you.
                                         (Exeunt Mrs. Free. on one side of the stage, and Charl. and Governess on the other.)

END OF THE THIRD ACT.

[Page 64]
ACT IV. SCENE I. A summer apartment in Baltimore's house, with a glass door opened to a lawn. The scene without is seen in the sober light of a calm summer evening, with the sun already set. Enter Baltimore and Mrs. Baltimore from an inner room. Baltimore speaking as they enter. Let us say no more about it, then. I forgive the little deceit of concealment which my temper, become too hasty of late, may, perhaps, justify. I will confess that the irritation excited in my mind by seeing that girl so frequently with you is unreasonable, is capricious. But you must bear with me a little, my Isabella. It is a part of the infirmity that oppresses me: it is the fretted edge of a deep and rankling—Come, come, come! we'll say no more about it. Let us forswear this subject. Let us now talk, even when we are alone, of light and indifferent things.
Mrs. B. Indeed, I believe it will be safest for us, till this passing storm, it will be but a summer storm I hope, is past over our heads. (assuming cheerfulness.) And now, to begin upon this salutary plan of your's, without loss of time, let me boast to you of the beautiful collection of plants I have
[Page 65]
nursed with my own hands, in a sly corner of the garden. You have never yet been to see them.
Balt. (eagerly.) Ay, even there too.
Mrs. B. What do you mean?
Balt. (peevishly.) Go to! you have heard, as well as I, of the ridiculous expence he has been at [25]   in seeds, and rare plants, and flower-roots, and nonsense; and of the learned botanist he is to pay so liberally for publishing a catalogue of them for the use of the scientific world—All that abominable ostentation. Ha, ha, ha! He does not know a nettle from a crow-foot on his native fields. Ha, ha, ha, ha!—You don't laugh, I think?
Mrs. B. We were to talk, you know, of indifferent things. But I have forgot to tell you of what really is not indifferent: I had a letter from my sister this morning, and, she says, your little godson is quite recovered from the remains of his illness. (pauses for an answer.)
Balt. (nodding his head but not attending to her.) Umph.
Mrs. B. (coaxingly.) She says he has become so chattering, and so playful, it is delightful to see him! And he talks of his godfather very often!
Balt. (nodding again.) Umph.
Mrs. B. He was always a great favourite of your's.
Balt. (breaking out vehemently.) If any man but himself had been guilty of half that ridiculous vanity, the dullest fool in the county would have laughed at him.

[Page 66]
Mrs. B. O dear! still dwelling upon these ideas!
                                         (he turns from her, and walks to the bottom of the stage; she sighs deeply, and follows him with her eyes. A long pause.) Enter Servet. Serv. (to Balt.) [50]   Excuse me if I intrude, Sir. And you too, my good lady, (bowing very low to Mrs. B.) Here is a letter that I received a few moments ago, and I thought it expedient and proper that you should know its contents immediately. (gives the letter to Balt.)
Balt. Let me see. (reads.) “An unknown well-wisher thinks it right to inform you, that your friend”—
Serv. He ought to have said patron, Sir. I'm sure, I have always been proud to name you as my patron to every body:—the family of Baltimore has always been such to me.
Balt. Well, well, no matter. (reads again) “To ruin your friend, 'Squire Baltimore. His adversary”—
Serv. Meaning Freeman, Sir.
Balt. I understand! (reads again.) “His adversary being busy in buying up the claims of some of his principal creditors. If he would walk long at large, let him walk cautiously.”
Serv. Meaning that he will lay you up, Sir.
Balt. I understand it perfectly.
Mrs. B. O no, no! Some malicious person has written this.
Balt. Permit me, Madam, to speak to my man of business, without interruption.

[Page 67]
Serv. [75]   No wonder, Sir, that Mrs. Baltimore should think so. He makes such a good show with his actions, that he must set about such things very cunningly.
Balt. Yes, Servet, thou hast always had some notion of his true character.
Serv. To think that there should be such hypocrisy in the world! It grieves, it distresses me!
Balt. Pooh, man! never mind how many hypocrites there are in the world, if he be but found amongst the number.
Serv. Ay, Sir; but if he get you once into prison—
Balt. Will he not be detested for it?
Serv. But if he should take the borough from you—
Balt. Well! and if he should take my life too, would he not be hanged for it?
Serv. To be sure, there would be some satisfaction in that if you could peep through your winding-sheet to see it.
Balt. He will now appear to the world in his true colours: I shall now speak boldly of a determined and palpable wrong: It relieves me from a heavy load. Give me thy hand, my friend Servet; thou has brought me admirable news.
Serv. [100]   But, Sir, we must take care of ourselves. For he is come of such a low, cunning, mean set of people—
Balt. Ha! you know this, do you? You know something of his family?

[Page 68]
Serv. Yes, I know well enough: and his father every body knows was no better than a—a—a—
Balt. Than a what?—Out with it, man!
Serv. Than a—Than a—
Balt. (eagerly.) Than a thief? Is that it? O prove to me, only prove to me, that his father was a thief, and I'll give thee all that I have in the world.
Serv. No, not absolutely that—but no better than a paltry weaver.
Balt. (disappointed.) Pooh! I knew that before.
Serv. Yes, every body knows it, to be sure. But there is no time to be lost: I am so zealous about it, that I can't rest till I have further information. I'll take horse directly and go in quest of it. I know where to enquire, and I shall return to you without loss of time.
Balt. Do so, my good friend, and don't be afraid of bringing back what you will call bad news. I shall not shrink from it.
                                         (Exit Servet.                                          (turning to Mrs. B. who has been listening to their conversation with great marks of distrust and disapprobation.) And so, Madam, you are diffident of all this?
Mrs. B. [125]   It will be impossible at this moment to make you view it in the same light that I do.
Balt. Yes, Madam, I knew it would be so with you. He has bewitched and thrown a veil over the understandings of all men! I have perceived it long. Even from the first of his settling in the neighbourhood, my friends have begun to look on me not as they were wont to do. Even my very
[Page 69]
tenants and dependants salute me less cheerily. He has thrown a veil over the understandings of all men! He has estranged from me that sympathy and tenderness, which should have supported my head in the day of adversity.
Mrs. B. Ah, my dear Baltimore! It is you who have got a veil, a thick and gloomy veil cast over your mind. That sympathy and tenderness is still the same (pressing his hand.) And, if the day of adversity must come, you will be convinced of it. But let us for a while give up thinking of these things: let us walk out together, and enjoy the soothing calmness of this beautiful twilight. The evening-star already looks from his peaceful sky: no sound of busy man is to be heard: the bat, and the beetle, and the night-fly are abroad, and the pleasing hum of happy unseen life is in the air. [150]   Come forth, my husband. The shade of your native trees will wave over your head; the turf your infant feet first trod will be under your steps. Come forth, my friend, and more blessed thoughts will visit you.
Balt. No, no; my native trees and my native lawns are to me more cheerless than the dreary desert. I can enjoy nothing. The cursed neighbourhood of one obnoxious being has changed every thing for me. Would he were— (clenching his hands and muttering.)
Mrs. B. O! what are you saying?
Balt. (turning away from her.) No matter what.

[Page 70]
Enter a little Boy from the lawn by the glass-door, running wildly, and frightened. Boy. He'll be drown'd, if nobody runs to save him! He'll be drown'd! he'll be drown'd!
Mrs. B. Has any body fallen into the pond?
Boy. Yes, Madam; into the deepest part of it; and, if nobody does not run to pull him out, he'll be drowned.
Balt. (running eagerly towards the glass-door.) I'll go. Dost thou know who it is, boy?
Boy. Yes, to be sure, Sir; it is 'Squire Freeman's own self.
                                         (Balt. starts, and stops short. Mrs. B. clasping her hands and holding them up to heaven remains in anxious suspence. Balt. after a moment's pause, rushes out quickly.) Mrs. B. O God! what will this come to!
                                         (throws herself back into a chair, and remains stupid and motionless. The boy stands staring at her.) Boy. Are you not well, Ma'am? Shall I call any body? (She makes no answer: he still stands staring at her.) [175]   She don't speak: she don't look at nothing: I will call somebody. (goes to the side-scene, and calls.) Who's there, I beseech you? O, hear me, hear me! Who's there, I say?
Enter Housemaid and Coachman. Housem. What a bawling you make here, with your dusty feet, you little nasty jackanapes! How dare you for to steal into a clean house?
Coach. If he be'n't that little devil that put the cracker under my horse's tail, I have no eyes in my head. He is always prowling about: there is never
[Page 71]
a dog hanged, nor a kitten drowned, in the parish, but he must be after it.
Boy. (pointing.) Look there: what is the matter with the lady?
Housm. O, mercy on us! my dear good lady? Are you sick Ma'am? or swoonding? or beside yourself? Run, Coachy, stupid oaf! and fetch us something.
Coach. I would run to the farthest nook of the earth if I only knew what to bring. Will burnt feathers, or a little aqua-vitæ do you any good?
Mrs. B. (starting up.) Do you hear any noise? Are they coming yet? I'll go out myself.
                                         (endeavours to go out, but cannot. Housemaid and Coachman support her.) Enter David hastily from the lawn. Dav. He is saved, Madam!
Mrs. B. O, what say you, David!
Dav. [200]   He has saved 'Squire Freeman. He threw himself into the deep water, and plashed about his arms lustily, till he caught him by the hair of his head, and drew him to the bank. One minute more had made a dead man of him.
Mrs. B. Who did that? Who caught him by the hair of the head?
Dav. My master, Madam; and a brave man he is.
Mrs. B. (holding up her hands in extacy.) Thy master! ay, and my husband! and God Almighty's good creature, who has formed every thing good! O, yes! he has made every being with good
[Page 72]
in it, and will at last make it perfectly so, in some way or other, known only to his wisdom. Ha! I hear a noise on the lawn.
Boy. (running out.) I must not lose a sight of the drowned man. For he'll be as dropping wet as any corpse, I dare say; for all that there is life in him.
                                         (Exit. Mrs. B. I'll go and meet them. I'm strong enough now.
Dav. Let me support you, Madam.
Housem. (to Coach. as they go out.) La! will he be all wet, do you think, and stretched upon his back?
                                         (Exeunt by the glass door into the lawn, Mrs. B. supported by David. Light from a window is now thrown across the path without doors, and discovers Baltimore and servants carrying Freeman into the house by another entry. The scene closes.) SCENE II. A room in Baltimore's house. Enter Simeon and David. Dav. Now, my Old Simeon, you'll see your master as hearty, after his ducking, as if he were an otter, and could live either in the water or out of it; though we had some trouble to bring him to his senses at first.
Sim. Ay, do let me go to him quickly. It had been a sorrowful day to this grey head if my master had—

[Page 73]
Dav. Yes, and if my master had not, as a body may say, put his life in his hand to save him.
Sim. Very true, David, I say nothing against all that: I honour your master for it; thof I must say he has but an ungracious look with him. There is not another gentleman in the neighbourhood, thof I say it myself, that does not stop and say, “How do ye do, Old Simeon?” when he passes me.
Dav. I don't know; I'm sure he used not to be ungracious. All the old folks of the parish used to thrust themselves in his way, as if it had been good for the ague, or an aching in the bones, to say “God bless your honour.”
Sim. That must have been before we came amongst you, then. Ha! here comes his Honour.
                                         (Enter Freeman, dressed in a night-gown, with Truebridge and Charles Baltimore. Mrs. Baltimore, at the same time, enters by another door.) Sim. (going eagerly to his master, and kissing his hand, which Freeman holds out to him.) God bless [25]   and preserve your worthy Honour!
Free. I thank you, Simeon: a good God has preserved me. You have not been much alarmed, I hope?
Sim. No, Sir; I heard of your safety before I heard of your danger; but some how or other it came across my heart, for all that; and I could not but think—I could not— (pauses and draws the back of his hand across his eyes.) But the blessings of the aged and helpless have borne you up: the water could have no commission to hurt you.

[Page 74]
True. Well said, good Simeon! the blessings of the aged and the helpless are of a very buoyant quality. A cork jacket is nothing to them.
Free. Do my wife and daughter know of it?
Sim. No, please your honour; my mistress is not returned from her visit yet, and my poor young lady is closed up in her room with Madumselle, taking on her book-larning, as I suppose.
Free. I'll go home then, before they know any thing of it. (to Mrs. B.) My dear Madam, I return you my warmest acknowledgments. You flattered me, that I should have an opportunity, before I leave the house, of thanking, once more, the brave man who has saved my life.
Mrs. B. [50]   He will come to you immediately.
Char. (to Mrs. B.) Faith! I went to him myself, as you desired me, and he won't come.
Mrs. B. (frowning significantly to Char.) I have just come from him, and he will be here immediately.
Char. You went too, did you? I couldn't—
(Mrs. B. frowns again, and Char. is silent.) True. (to Free.) You had better sit down till he come.
Char. Yes, do sit in this chair in the recess; for you don't like the light in your eyes, I perceive. (leading Free. kindly to the chair.)
Free. I thank you. You are very good to me, friend Charles. I think you would have lent a helping hand yourself, if you had been in the way, to have saved a poor neighbour from drowning.

[Page 75]
Char. I should have been a Pagan else. (Free. sits down and they all gather round him.) Now, my good Sir, it is pleasanter to sit in a dry seat like this, with so many friendly faces round you, than to squash amongst the cold mud and duck-weed, with roaches and eels for your comrades.
Free. Indeed, friend Charles, I sha'n't contradict you.
(Enter Baltimore, going directly across the stage towards the opposite door, by which Free. and the others had entered, without perceiving them in the recess.) Free. He thinks I am still in the bed-room.
                                         (goes behind Balt. and lays his hand kindly upon his shoulder.) Balt. Nay, my dear Isabella! let me go by myself! [75]   I would rather encounter him alone, than when you are all staring upon me.
Free. (still holding him.) Ha, ha, ha! My brave deliverer! I have caught you.
Balt. (turning hastily about, and shaking himself loose from his hold.) Ha! is it you?
Free. (stepping back disappointed.) It is me, Sir; and I flattered myself that the overflowings of a grateful heart would not be offensive.
Balt. They are not offensive, Sir; you mistake me. You are too—There is no occasion for all these thanks: I do not deserve them.
Sim. (vehemently.) Ah, but you do, Sir! and all the country round will thank you too. There is not a soul of them all, thof he might not care a
[Page 76]
brass penny for you before, who will not fill a bumper to your health now, for saving to them his noble and liberal Honour. O, Sir! the blessings of every body will be upon your head now.
Balt. (turning away frowningly from Sim.) So, so!
Mrs. B. Old Simeon says very true: every body will bless you.
Balt. (turning away from her.) This is pleasant, indeed!
Char. I'll be hang'd if every old woman in the parish don't foist you into her next Sunday's prayers, [100]   along with the Royal Family.
Balt. (turning away from Char.) Must I be beleager'd by every fool?
                                         (goes hastily towards the door.) Mrs. B. (aside, running after him.) You will not go away so abruptly?
Balt. (aside, to her.) Will there be no end to this damned gratitude? (about, to Free.) Sir, I am very happy—I—I hope you will have a good sleep after this accident; and I shall be happy to hear good accounts of you to-morrow morning.
Free. No, Mr. Baltimore, we must not part thus. My gratitude for what you have done is not to be spent in words only: that is not my way. I resign to you and resign to you, most cheerfully, all my interest in the borough of Westown.
(Balt. pauses.) True. That is nobly said, Mr. Freeman, and I expected it from you.

[Page 77]
Char. (rubbing his hands, and grinning with delight.) I thought so!—I thought it would come to this: he has such a liberal way with him in every thing.
Balt. (half-aside to Char.) Wilt thou never give over that vile habit of grinning like a dog? (going up with a firm proud step to Free. No, Sir; we have entered the lists as fair combatants together, and neither of us, I hope, (significantly) have taken any unfair advantage of the other. Let the most fortunate [125]   gain the day. I will never receive reward for a common office of humanity. That is not my way (mimicking Freeman.)
Free. Let me intreat you!
Balt. Mention it no more: I am determined.
Free. It would make me infinitely happy.
Balt. Do me the honour to believe that I speak truth, when I say, I am determined. If you give up the borough, I give it up also.
Free. Then I say no more. I leave with you the thanks of a grateful heart. I should have said, if it had been permitted me, the very grateful affection of an honest heart, that it will never forget what it owes to you but in that place where both affection and animosity are forgotten.
                                         (Exit with emotion, followed by Charles and Simeon.) Mrs. B. O Baltimore! Baltimore! Will you suffer him to go thus?
Balt. (going two or three steps after him, and stopping short.) He is gone now.
Mrs. B. No, he is not; you may easily overtake him. Do—for the love of gentleness and charity!

[Page 78]
Balt. (going hastily towards the door, and stopping short again.) No, hang it! I can't do it now.
                                         (Exit hastily by the opposite side.) Mrs. B. (shaking her head.) I had great hopes from this accident; but his unhappy aversion is, I fear, incurable.
True. Don't despair yet: I prophecy better [150]   things. But do not, my dear Madam, before Baltimore at least, appear so anxious about it. It serves only to irritate him.
Mrs. B. Is it possible to be otherwise than anxious? This unlucky prejudice, gradually gaining strength from every little trivial circumstance, embitters all the comfort of our lives. And Freeman has so many good qualities—he might have been a valuable friend.
True. Very true; he is liberal, good-tempered, and benevolent; but he is vain, unpolished, and, with the aid of his ridiculous wife to encourage him, most provokingly ostentatious. You ought to make some allowance for a proud country gentleman, who now sees all the former dependants of his family ranging themselves under the patronage of a new, and, what he will falsely call, a mean man.
Mrs. B. O, I would make every allowance! but I would not encourage him in his prejudice.
True. The way to reclaim him, however, is not to run directly counter to it. I have never found him so ready to acknowledge Freeman's good qualities as when I have appeared, and have really been
[Page 79]
half provoked myself with his vanity and magnificence. [175]   When we would help a friend out of the mire, we must often go a little way into it ourselves.
Mrs. B. I believe you are right. Ah! Truebridge! if you had been more amongst us lately, we should not now, perhaps, have been so unhappy. He would have listened more to you than to any other friend.
True. Have good comfort: I don't despair.
                                         (Exeunt. SCENE III. Night. An open space before the Blue Posts: the scene dark except where the light gleams from the open door of the house. A noise of drinking and merriment heard within. Enter some of Baltimore's voters, &c. from the house, carrying a table, a bowl of punch and glasses, which they set down in the porch, and place themselves round on the benches at the door. Sailor. Now, messmates, let us set down our bowl here. We have been long enough stow'd in that there close smoky hold, while the fresh air has been playing on the decks. Let us sit down and be merry! I am return'd home in a good jolly time, old neighbours; let us enjoy it.
First Vote. Ay, I remember at our last election, when 'Squire Burton was chosen, we drank a hearty bowl in this very porch, and neighbour Bullock, the tanner, sat as it were in that very corner. Rest his soul! he loved his country, and his king, and his cause, and his candidate, as well as any heart in Old England.

[Page 80]
Second Vote. Ay, and he was always ready to knock any body down that was not as hearty as himself. That was what I liked in him. That was the true spirit. That was the true roast beef of old England.
First Vote. And he had such a good knack at a toast. Come, stand up, Mr. Alderman. We have drunk already to the ancient family of the Baltimores, give us some other good public toast. You have a good knack at the business too. I would give you one myself, but then I doesn't know how [25]   to do it for want of education.
Ald. (standing up conceitedly.) May all the king, and the queen, and the royal family, and all the rest of the nobility and members of parliament, serving over them and under us be good; and may all us, serving under them again be—be—be happy and be good too, and be—and be—
Second Vote. Just as we should be.
First Vote. Ay, just so. Very well and very nicely said, Mr. Alderman!
Second Vote. But does nobody drink to the navy of old England.
Ald. Yes, man: stop a little, and I'll have a touch at that too.
First Vote. Ay, do so. I stand up for the British navy; that I do. The sea is our only true friend either by land or by water. Come, give us a sailor's song, Will Weatherall. I have lived upon dry land all my days, and never saw better than a little punt-boat shov'd across the ferry for a sixpence; but some how or other I have a kindness for every
[Page 81]
thing that pertains to the great salt sea, with all the ships, and the waves roaring, and all that; and whenever I sees a good heart of oak seated at an alehouse door with his glass in his hand, my heart [50]   always turns to him, and there should be a hundred men besides. Give us a song, man.
Sailor. That I will. Hang me if thou does'n't deserve to feed upon biscuit.
SONG.

Merry mantling social bowl,
Many a cheerful kindly soul
   Fills his glass from thee:
Healths go round, care is drown'd,
Every heart with lighter bound
   Gen'rous feels and free.

Cann and beaker by thy side,
May'st thou oft' in flowing pride
   Thus surrounded be:
And shame befal the narrow mind,
That to a messmate proves unkind,
   Who once hath fill'd his glass from thee!

Whate'er our state, where'er we meet,
We'll still with kindly welcome greet
   The mate of former jollity:
Far distant, in a foreign land,
We'll give to all a brother's hand
   That e'er have filled their glass from thee.
[Page 82]
Enter Margery in great fury. Mar. Dash down your bowl, and break all your glasses in shivers? Are you sitting singing here, and 'Squire Baltimore hurried away to prison [75]   by his vile rascality creditors? Shame upon your red chops! Who pays for the liquor you are drinking?
All. You're wrong in the head, Margery.
Mar. Ye're wrong in the heart, and that's a worse thing, ungrateful punch swillers! You would be all up on end in a moment else; for I saw them lay their detestable paws upon him with mine own eyes. Rise up every skin of you, or I'll break the bowl about your ears! I'll make the liquor mount to your noddles, I warrant you!
All. (starting up.) Which way did they go?
Mar. Come, follow me and I'll shew you. Let them but come within reach of my clench'd fist, and I'll teach them to lay hands upon his honour! An esquire and a gentleman born.
                                         (Exeunt, every body following her with great noise and hubbub.)

END OF THE FOURTH ACT.

[Page 83]
ACT V. SCENE I. A vaulted passage in a prison. Enter Keeper, with several Turnkeys bearing pots of porter, &c. for the prisoners. Keep. (calling to somebody without.) Take another pot of porter to the dog-stealer in the north ward, and a Welsh rabbit to his comrade. (to another who enters with a covered dish.) Where have you been all this time?
1st Turn. Waiting on the rich debtor in the best chamber; he has fallen out with his stew'd carp, because the sauce of it be'nt cook'd to his liking.
Keep. I'm sorry for that: we must spare no pains upon him.
Enter 2d Turnkey. 2d Turn. (holding out a small jug.) Come, come, this won't do. Transportation-Betty says, nothing but true neat Hollands for her; and this here gin you have sent her be'nt fit for a gentlewoman to drink.
Keep. Yes, yes; travell'd ladies are woundy nice. However, we must not quarrel with her neither: take it to the poor author in the debtor's ward; it will be good enough for him.

[Page 84]
Enter Truebridge. True. What part of the prison is Mr. Baltimore in?
Keep. I'll shew you, Sir; follow me.
True. I thought to have found him in your own house. In the common prison?
Keep. [25]   It is his own fault, Sir; he would go no where else; and the more miserable every thing is about him, the better he likes it. His good lady could scarcely prevail upon him to let us set a couple of chairs in his room.
True. Has she been long here?
Keep. Better than an hour I should think.
True. Does he seem much affected?
Keep. Anan, Sir?
True. I mean, much cast down.
Keep. O, Lud; no, Sir! I dare say not; you know people are used to such things every day.
True. Very true, Mr. Keeper, I forgot that.— Show me the way.
                                         (Exeunt. SCENE II. A prison. Baltimore is discovered sitting in a thoughtful posture, with Mrs. Baltimore resting her arm on the back of his chair, and observing him attentively. Balt. (after starting up with alacrity, and walking several times up and down.) And they are calling out, as they go thro' the streets, that I am a true Baltimore, and the son of their old benefactor?

[Page 85]
Mrs. B. They are, indeed. The same party that assembled to attempt your rescue, are still parading about tumultuously, and their numbers are continually increasing.
Balt. That's right! The enemy, I hope, has heard the sound of it round his doors: they have bid him a good morrow cheerily.
Mrs. B. I don't believe they suspect him yet, for it is too bad to imagine.
Balt. (exultingly.) But they will all know it soon. All the world will know it. Man, woman, and child will know it; and even clothed in the very coats his ostentatious bounty has bestow'd upon them, the grey-headed labourers will curse him. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha! How many chaldron of coals, and hogsheads of ale, and well fatten'd oxen will, in one untoward moment, be forgotten by those ungrateful hinds! Ha, ha, ha! The very children will call to him as he passes by. Methinks I tread lightly on the floor of this dungeon, with the step of an injured man who rises from the grasp of oppression. [25]   Raise thy drooping head, my Isabella: I am a thousand times more happy than I have been: all mankind will sympathize with me now.
Mrs. B. Every honest breast, indeed, must detest baseness and hypocrisy.
Balt. Ay, thou speak'st with some energy now. Come to my heart! there will be sympathy between us. Now, thou art the wife of Baltimore! But oh! my Isabella! a poor man's wife has many duties to fulfil.

[Page 86]
Mrs. B. None that I will not most cheerfully fulfil.
Balt. Ah! thou art a fair flower planted on an ungracious soil, and I have nursed thee rudely.
Mrs. B. O, no! you were most kind and gentle once.
Balt. And I will be so again, Isabella: for this viper gnaw'd at my heart, and I could be gentle to nothing; not even to thee. But my heart feels lighter now; I will be rough to thee no more.
Enter Truebridge. Ha! my friend! good morning to you! Nay, nay: (taking his hand frankly.) don't be afraid to look at me: I wear no desponding face upon it. (pointing to the bare walls of his prison.) You see what a happy thing it is to have a liberal, generous, [50]   magnificent rival to contend with. Have you seen any of my good noisy friends on your way?
True. Yes, crowds of them; and I really believe this arrest will gain you your election. There is something in man that always inclines him to the side of the oppressed.
Balt. Ay, by God! and the savage feels it more strongly than the philosopher.
True. He was always a ridiculous ostentatious fellow; but if Freeman has thought to ruin your cause by the unworthy means you hint at, he is the greatest fool as well as the greatest knave in the community.
Balt. (ironically.) Don't be too severe upon him! he has been bred to turn his money to good account,
[Page 87]
you know: a purchased debt is his property as well as a bale of broadcloth; and he has a great many charitable deeds and bountiful donations to put into the balance against one little underhand act of unmanly baseness.
True. Hang all his bountiful donations! If he has done this, I will curse him by the hour-glass with any good fellow that will keep me company.
Balt. Nay, nay, nay! you are warm, Truebridge. You are of an irritable disposition. You have no [75]   charitable allowances to make for the failings of good people. Ha, ha, ha!
Enter Turnkey. Turn. Mr. Freeman begs to be admitted to see Mr. Baltimore.
Balt. (stretching out his arm vehemently.) Does he, by my conscience! (to True.) What think you of this?
True. If things are as we suspect, it does, indeed, exceed all ordinary calculations of effrontery.
Balt. (to Turn.) Let him be admitted. (exit Turn.) Now we shall see the smoothness of his snake's skin; but the switch, not the sword, shall scotch it. (walks hastily up and down.)
Enter Freeman. Balt. (stopping short upon his entrance, and assumes an ironical respect.) Good morning, worthy Sir. You are the only man in England, I may say in Europe, nay, I will say in the whole habitable globe, for you love magnificence, Mr. Freeman, whose dauntless
[Page 88]
confidence could have been wound up to the steady intrepidity of such a visit.
Free. (simply.) O, no, my friend, don't praise me more than I deserve. In courage to run to the assistance of a friend, you yourself have set me the example; and my character, I hope, will never be found deficient in any thing that becomes a good neighbour, and an honest man.
Balt. (smiling sarcastically.) [100]   Certainly, Sir; be at all pains to preserve, in the public opinion, your invaluable character. I would really advise you to have a certificate of all your eminent virtues drawn up, and sign'd by every housekeeper in the parish. Your wonderful liberalities in worsted hose and linsey-woolsey petticoats; your princely subscriptions for bridges and market-places; and your noble donations to lying-in hospitals, have raised your reputation over the whole country: and if the baseness of treacherously entrapping a fair and open rival, whom you profess'd to respect, can throw any shade upon your sublime virtues, you have only to build a tower to the parish church, or a new alms-house, and that will set every thing to rights again, (aside to True.) Look how he draws in his detestable mouth, and stares upon me like a cat?
Free. I now perceive, Sir, the point of your discourse, and I forgive every thing that it insinuates. I might say many things, but there is just one simple answer I will return to it. All my fortune is at this moment at your disposal. You shall now be a free unencumber'd man, owing no man any
[Page 89]
thing. For how can you be said to be indebted to one who owes even his own life to you. To tell [125]   you this, was my errand here.
Balt. (shrinking back, and then recovering himself with proud disdain.) And I, noble Sir, have one simple answer to return to you: I will rather remain in this prison till the hand of death unbolt my door, than owe my enlargement to you. Your treachery and your ostentatious generosity are equally contemptible.
Free. On the word of an honest man, I have had no knowledge of this shameful arrest.
Balt. And on the word of a gentleman, I believe you not.
Free. Will you put this affront upon me?
Balt. (smiling maliciously.) Only if you are obliging enough to bear it. Do entirely as you please. (aside to True. turning away contemptuously from Free.) See how like a sneaking timid reptile he looks.
                                         (walks up and down proudly.) Mrs. B. much alarmed (to Free.) O, leave him! leave him! You must not speak to him now: he knows not what he says.
True. (aside to Free.) Go away for the present, Mr. Freeman, and I will call upon you by and bye. If you are an honest man, you are a noble one.
Free. (impressively.) In simple truth, then, I am an honest man; and I shall be glad to have some discourse with you whenever you are at leisure.
                                         (Exit.
[Page 90]
Balt. (stopping short in his walk and looking round.) [150]   Is he gone? (to Free.) What did you think of that? Was it not admirable? (endeavouring to laugh but cannot.) The devil himself will now appear a novice in hypocrisy.
True. Faith! Baltimore, I cannot think him guilty: he wears not the face of a guilty man.
                                         (Baltimore's countenance falls: he turns away abruptly from Truebridge and walks up and down in disorder.) Mrs. B. (perceiving Freeman's hat on the ground, which he had dropt in his confusion.) Mr. Freeman has left his hat behind him.
                                         (As she stoops to lift it Balt. runs furiously up to her and prevents her.) Balt. Touch not the damned thing, or I will loath thee! Who waits without? hollo! Turnkey! (Enter Turnkey; and he, giving the hat a kick with his foot, tosses it across the stage.) Take away that abomination, do!
                                         (Exit hastily into an inner apartment.) True. Don't lose hopes of fair weather, my dear Madam, tho' we are now in the midst of the storm. Follow and sooth him, if it be possible, and I'll go in the mean time to Freeman.
                                         (Exeunt severally.
[Page 91]
SCENE III. An open scattered street in a small country town. Enter Jenkison and Servet by opposite sides; and are going to pass without observing one another. Serv. (calling to Jenk.) Not so fast, Mr. Jenkison, I was just going to your house.
Jenk. And I was just going to do myself the pleasure to call at your's.
Serv. And you was glad to go quickly along, I believe. It would neither be pleasant nor safe for you, perhaps, to meet the new member in his chair, with all his friends round him. “Baltimore for ever!” would not sound very pleasantly in your ears. Ay, Mr. Jenkison! You have made a fine hand of this business for a man of your pretensions in the profession.
Jenk. I believe, Mr. Servet, I may be permitted to assume to myself, without the imputation of vanity, as much professional dexterity in this affair as the most able of my contemporaries could have brought into the service. Every thing has been done that the very nicest manœuvres of the law would admit of. Who could have thought of a rich friend, from nobody knows where, paying Baltimore's debts for him? Who could have thought of those fools taking him up so warmly upon his imprisonment, in manifest contradiction to the old proverb, that “rats and vermin leave a falling [25]   house?” Who could have thought so many of Mr.
[Page 92]
Freeman's friends would have stay'd from the poll, too, after solemnly promising their votes? I am sure you are too polite not to do me the justice to confess that these things were not to be counted upon. A pinch of your snuff, if you please: you keep the best rappee of any gentleman in the county.
Serv. But what can you say for yourself in the present bussiness, Mr. Jenkison? I'm sure, my client, Mr. Baltimore, has given you advantages enough, if you had known how to use them. Since his quarrel with Mr. Freeman in the prison, have not you and I gone between them with at least half-a-dozen of messages, unknown to their friends? and nothing but a paltry meeting with pistols to come of it after all! It is a disgrace to the profession.
Jenk. What could I have done, Mr. Servet?
Serv. What could you have done! Has not my client by my mouth, told your client in pretty plain terms, in return to all his amicable advances, that he is a liar, and a hypocrite, and a knave, and a coward; and with but very little difficulty on your part a kick or a cudgel might have been added: and do you ask me what was to be done with all this? A meeting with pistols, indeed! It is a disgrace to the profession. [50]   I once procured for a smug-faced client of mine a good douse o' the chops, which put a couple of hundred pounds into his pocket; enabling him thereby to run off with a rich heiress, and make his fortune, as you may well say by a stroke. As for myself I put, of course, double the sum in my own.

[Page 93]
Jenk. Do me the favour to believe, my worthy Sir, that I have always looked up to your superior abilities with the profoundest respect. But have a little patience: and do me the honour to suppose I am not altogether a novice. We may have a duel first and a law-suit afterwards. I suppose we shall have the pleasure of meeting at the place and hour appointed?
Ser. Never doubt that. But I hear the crowd coming this way. (some of the crowd begin to enter, and a great noise is heard at a distance.) Let us avoid them, and talk further of this matter as we go.
                                         (exeunt Jenk. and Serv. Enter more of the crowd.) First Mob. Well, I can't say but it was a rare speech.
Second Mob. And very nicely delivered.
First Mob. Ay, he is a nice man.
First Woman. And such a sweet-faced gentleman. He'll stand by his king and country, I warrant ye.
First Mob. (to third Mob.) [75]   But you lost it all, neighbour Brown, you was so long of coming. “Gentlemen,” said he, and he bowed his head so, “the honour you have this day preferred me to”—
Second Mob. No, no, man; “that you have conferred upon me.”
First Mob. Well, well, where's the difference? “I shall ever consider upon”—
Second Mob. Reflect upon.
First Mob. Did not I say reflect upon? “With— with great joy” no “great”—I don't know very
[Page 94]
well; but he meant, as one should say, as how he would think upon us with good-will. And then, quoth he,—but first of all you know, he said, stretching out his hand so, that “the confidence imputed to him.”
Second Mob. Tut, man! reposed upon him.
First Mob. Did not I say so as plain as a man could speak?—Was a trust that, with the greatest scrupulousness of regard—That is to say, you know, that he won't sell his vote for a pension: nor give away our poor little earnings to feed a parcel of lazy placemen and courtiers, Lord, help us! And that he won't do.
Third Mob. No, no! I'll answer for him. Why [100]   I have heel-pieced his shoes for him when he was no bigger than a quart-pot.
First Mob. But what pleased me most of all was, when he waved his hand in this fashion, and said, “Gentlemen, It has always been the pride and boasting—
Second Mob. Pride and boast.
First Mob. No, indeed; I say pride and boasting, Thomas Truepenny; have not I a pair of ears in my head as well as you?
Second Mob. Well, well, boasting be it then!
First Mob. Yes, “boasting of this honourable borough to support its own dignity and independency against all corruptful encroachments.” And then he went on to tell us, you know, all about the glory and braveness of our ancestors—O! let him alone for a speech! I'll warrant ye, when he stands
[Page 95]
up among the great men in that there house of parliament, he'll set his words together in as good a fashion as the best of them.
Second Mob. Yes, to be sure, if he does it in the fashion that you have been a-shewing us.
Second Woman. O la! there he comes, and the pretty chair and all the pretty ribbons flying about! Do come and let us run after him.
                                         (Enter a great crowd, and Baltimore carried in a chair ornamented with boughs and ribbons, &c. on the back ground, and crossing over the bottom of the stage exeunt with acclamations: the first crowd joining them.) SCENE IV. An open space in a forest surrounded with thickets and fern, &c. Enter Baltimore and Servet, looking out several ways as they enter. Serv. Now I do see them a-coming!
Balt. You have discovered them half-a-dozen of times already since we entered the forest: Are they at hand?
Serv. (still looking out thro' some bushes.) They an't far off, but I don't know how it is they keep always a-moving and always a-moving, and yet they never come nearer.
Balt. He stops to take heart perhaps.
                                         (smiling with malicious satisfaction.) Serv. Yes, poor man, ha, ha, ha! his mind is disturb'd enough, no doubt. But you, Sir, are so composed! You have the true strong nerves of a
[Page 96]
gentleman. Good blood always shews itself upon these occasions. (looking out again.) Yonder now, I could tell you, even at this distance, by that very manner of waving his pocket handkerchief that he is in a devilish quandary.
Balt. Indeed! dost thou already discover in him the disturbed gait of a frightened man? This is excellent!—Let me look! let me look! (looking thro' the bushes with great satisfaction and eagerness.) Where, Servet?
Serv. Look just between the birch-tree and the little gate.
Balt. (peevishly.) Pooh, nonsense! It is a colt [25]   feeding amongst the bushes, and lashing off the flies with his tail.
                                         (As they are looking, enter Freeman and Jenkison behind them.) Free. Good morning, gentlemen: I hope we have not kept you waiting.
Balt. I am here, Sir, at your request, to give you the satisfaction you require, and I have waited your time without impatience.
Free. Ah, Mr. Baltimore! it is a cruel necessity that has compell'd me to require such a meeting as this from a man to whom I owe my life. But life, with contempt and degradation in the eye of the world annex'd to it, is no benefit: you have cruelly compell'd me—
Balt. Make no apology, Sir, for the invitation you have given me to this place: it is the only one in my life that I have received from you with pleasure, and obey'd with alacrity.

[Page 97]
Free. You will regret, perhaps, when it is too late, that some explanation, on your part, did not prevent—
Jenk. Yes, Sir, some little explanation of your words. The most honourable gentleman is always free to confess that words are not always intended to convey the meaning they may obviously seem to express.
Balt. (contemptuously.) I make no doubt, Sir, that [50]   you can find a great many different meanings to the same words. A lie may be easily turn'd into a slight mistake, or a villain into a gentleman of deep and ingenious resource, in your polite dictionary: but I am a plain unpolish'd man, Mr. Jenkison, and I have but one sense in which I offer what I have said by the mouth of my friend here (pointing to Serv.) to Mr. Freeman, and to the world, unretracted and unexplain'd. (aside to Serv.) Does he not look pale?
Serv. O, very pale.
Free. Then, Mr. Baltimore, you compel a man of peace to be what he abhors.
Balt. I am sorry, Sir, this business is so disagreeable to you: the sooner we dispatch it, in that case, the better. Take your ground. (aside to Serv.) Does he not look very pale?
Serv. (aside.) O, as white as a corpse.
Free. I believe you are right (to Serv. and Jenk.) Mark out the distance, gentlemen: you know what is generally done upon these occasions, I am altogether ignorant. You seem to be ready, Mr. Baltimore, and so am I.

[Page 98]
Serv. (aside to Balt.) He would bully it out now, but he is in a great quandary for all that.
Balt. (aside to Serv. angrily.) [75]   No, hang him, he is as firm as a rock! (aloud to Free.) I am perfectly ready also, Sir. Now take your fire.
Free. No; I cannot call you out, and take the first fire myself: this does not appear to me reasonable.
Balt. You are the insulted man.
Free. Yes, but I am the challenger, and must insist on first receiving your's.
                                         (They take their ground, and Balt. is about to fire, when Truebridge and Charles Baltimore break in upon them thro' the bushes.) True. (seizing Baltimore's arm.) Hold your rash hand, madman, and make not yourself accursed!
Balt. What do you mean, Truebridge?
True. (pointing to Free.) That there stands before you the unknown friend—
Free. (to True. eagerly.) Hold, hold! remember your promise: I have bound you to it.
True. But you release me from that promise by effecting this meeting unknown to me, when I had every claim upon your confidence. I will not hold my tongue.
Balt. For God's sake, then, tell the worst thou hast got to say, for I am distracted!
True. There stands before you, then, that unknown friend; the great uncle of your wife, as I suffered you to suspect, who has paid all your debts, open'd your prison doors, and even kept
[Page 99]
[100]   back his own friends from the poll to make you the member for Westown.
                                         (Balt. staggers back some paces, and the pistol falls from his hand.) Char. (capering with joy.) O, brave and noble! this makes a man's heart jump to his mouth! Come here, Mr. Spitfire, (taking up the pistol.) we shall have no more occasion for you.
Balt. (giving Charles an angry push as he stoops down close by him to lift the pistol) Get away, damn'd fool! Does this make you happy?
True. Fie, Baltimore! It is not manly in thee to be thus overcome.
Balt. If thou had'st lodged a bullet in my brain I had thank'd thee for it.
True. And is there nothing, then, within your breast that is generously called forth to meet the noble gratitude of a liberal mind? A mind which has strove to acquit itself of the obligation that it owes to you, and to make you ample reparation for an injury which you have suffered on his account, tho' entirely unknown to him. There is nothing in your breast that comes forth to meet such sentiments as these. Injuries and oppression are pleasing to your mind; generosity and gratitude oppress it. Are these the feelings of a brave man? Come, come! (taking his arm gently.)
Balt. Hold, away! I am fool'd, and depress'd, [125]   and degraded!
                                         (turns away from him abruptly.) True. Well, then, battle out with your own proud spirit the best way you can. Freeman, I must agree to it, is a magnificent, boasting, ostentatious
[Page 100]
fellow; and devil take me if I could bear to have any reciprocity in good offices with him myself?
Balt. By the Lord! Truebridge, I'll run you thro' the body if you say that again.
True. Ha! come nearer to me then. I shall now tell Freeman of an obligation he owes to you, Baltimore, and we shall see if he bears it more graciously.
Free. I owe my life to his courage.
True. Yes, but it is not that. Come nearer me, Baltimore. (to Free.) You were anxious, I believe, to erect a monument to the memory of your father.
Free. Yes, Sir; and Mr. Jenkison has written for me to have it accomplish'd.
True. And also, at the same time, to have a certificate of your baptism?
Free. Yes, Sir, some family business required it; but I have yet received no answer.
True. No; the clergyman to whom you wrote is my particular friend; he has made the enquiries you desired; and the result is of such a nature that [150]   he has thought it necessary to be the bearer of it himself.
Free. What may it be?
True. He is at my house, and will inform you of every thing minutely; but, just at this moment, I can't help telling you myself, that to erect a monument to the memory of your father is unnecessary,
[Page 101]
as Mr. Baltimore has already piously saved you that trouble.
Free. What do you mean by that? I am a man of peace, but I will tear the heart out of any one who dares to insult my father's memory.
True. He has done it in sober piety.
Free. What! erected a monument for my father in the parish church of Southerndown?
True. No, in the parish church of Westown.
Free. My father is not buried there.
True. Ay, but he is, indeed. One church, one grave, one coffin contains both your father and his.
Free. O, God! what is this?
                                         (Balt. starts and puts his hands before his eyes.) Char. I would give a thousand pounds that this were true.
True (to Char.) Thou hast lost thy money then. But prithee be quiet, Charles!
                                         (Jenkison and Servet look ruefully upon one another.) Free. (after a pause.) Was not my mother the [175]   wife of Freeman?
True. Yes; and, I believe, his faithful wife; but she was your mother first.
Free. She was seduced and betray'd?
True. We will not, if you please, enter into that part of the story at present. My account says, that she married, after bringing you into the world, a poor but honest man: that the late Mrs. Baltimore discovered her some years afterwards, sympathised with her misfortune, and from her own pin-money, for the family affairs were even then very much involved,
[Page 102]
paid her a yearly sum for the support and education of her son, which laid the foundation of his future wealth and prosperity.
Balt. (stepping forward with emotion.) Did my mother do this?
True. Yes, Baltimore, she did: till Mrs. Freeman, inform'd of the state of your father's affairs, with an industry that defied all pain and weariness, toil'd night and day to support the aspiring views of her son, independent of a bounty which she would no longer receive, tho' it was often and warmly press'd upon her.
Free. (with emotion.) And did my mother do that?
True. [200]   She did, indeed.
Free. Then God bless her! I do not blush to call myself her son.
True. (stretching out his hands to Balt. and Free.) Now, don't think that I am going to whine to you about natural affection, and fraternal love, and such weaknesses. I know that you have lived in the constant practice of all manner of opposition and provocation towards one another for some time past: you have exercised your tempers thereby, and have acquired habits that are now, perhaps, necessary for you. Far be it from me to break in upon habits and gratifications! Only, as you are both the sons of one father, who now lies quietly in his grave, and of the good women, for I call them both good, who bore no enmity to one another, tho' placed in a situation very favourable for its growth,
[Page 103]
do for the love of decency take one another by the hand, and live peaceably and respectably together!
                                         (taking each of them by the hand.) Balt. (shaking off True.) Get away, Truebridge, and leave us to ourselves.
                                         (True. retires to the bottom of the stage, and makes signs for Jenk. Serv. and Char. to do so too: they all retire.)                                          (Balt. and Free. stand looking at one another for some time without speaking. Balt. then drawing nearer to Free. clears his voice, and puts on the action of one who is going to speak emphatically; but his energy is suddenly dropt, and he turns away without speaking. He draws near him a second time, clears his voice again, and speaks in broken accents.) Balt. I have been to you, Mr. Freeman, most unreasonable and unjust. I have—I have—my behaviour has been stern and ungracious—But— but my heart—O! it has offended beyond—beyond even the forgiveness of a—of a—
Free. (eagerly.) [225]   Of a what, Mr. Baltimore?
Balt. Of a brother.
Free. God bless you for that word! Are you the first to pronounce it? Yes, I will be a brother, and a father, and a friend, and an every thing to you, as long as there is breath in my body. And tho' we do not embrace as brothers—
Balt. (rushing into his arms.) Ah! but we do! we do! most heartily! But I have something to say,
[Page 104]
Let me lean against this tree for a little.
                                         (leans his back against a tree.) Free. What would you say?
Balt. (in a broken voice.) I am—I am where I ought not to be. Your generosity imposed upon you—the borough of Westown is vacant.
Free. No; it is filled with the man for whom I will henceforth canvass thro' thick and thin every shire, town, and village in the kingdom, if need be: the borough of Westown is not vacant.
Balt. (endeavouring to open his waistcoat and collar.) My buttons are tight over my breast: I cant't get this thing from my throat.
                                         (Free. attempts to assist him.) True. (running forward from the bottom of the stage.) Let me assist you, Baltimore.
Balt. No, no, hold away: he will do it for me. I feel the touch of a brother's hand near my breast, and it does me good.
True. (exulting.) Ha! is it thus with you? Then [250]   we have triumphed! conquest and victory!
Char. (tossing up his hat in the air.) Conquest and triumph and victory! O it is all right now!
True. Yes, Charles, thou may'st now be as boisterous as thou wilt.
Jenk. (aside to Serv.) We have made but a bad business of it here.
Ser. (aside to Jenk.) It was all your fault.
                                         (they quarrel in a corner, whilst Free. and True. are occupied with Balt.; and Charles runs exultingly about, tossing his hat in the air.)
[Page 105]
(Enter nearly at the same time, by opposite sides, Mrs. Baltimore and Mrs. Freeman with Charlotte. Mrs. B. (alarmed.) O, you are wounded, Baltimore.
True. No, no! there are no wounds here: we are victorious.
Mrs. B. Over whom?
True. Over a whole legion of devils! or, at least, over one great black one, who was as strong and as stubborn as a whole legion.
Mrs. B. (joyfully.) Ha! and is he overcome at last? Let me rejoice with you, my Baltimore! We have found our lost happiness again.
Balt. We have found something more, my dear Isabella: we have found a brother.
                                         (presenting Free. to Mrs. B.) Mrs. B. Yes, I knew you would find in this worthy man a friend and a brother.
Balt. Nay, nay! you don't catch my meaning: he is the son of my father.
Mrs. Free. What does he say?
Char. [275]   The son of his father! My ears are ringing.
Mrs. B. (after a pause of surprize.) In sober earnest truth? (clasping her hands together.) O thank heaven for it! (holding out her hand to Free.) My friend and my brother.
Balt. (to Free.) Yes, she has always been your friend.

[Page 106]
Free. (kissing her hand with emotion.) I know she has, and I have not been ungrateful. (presenting Mrs. Free. to Mrs. B. and Balt.) And here is one who has not been so much your friend as she will be. Her too warm interest in a husband's success misled her into an error which she sincerely repents.
Mrs. Free. (affectedly.) Mrs. Baltimore has too much sensibility herself not to pardon the errors it occasions in others.
Mrs. B. (taking her hand.) Be assured, my dear madam, I can remember nothing with resentment that is connected with our present happiness.
Serv. (aside to Jenk.) And Mrs. Freeman is shaking hands with them too! O! there will be a stagnation to all activity! there will not be a law-suit in the parish for a century to come!
Jenk. (aside.) Well, how could I help it? Walk this way for God's sake or they will hear us.
                                         (Jenk. and Ser. retire to the bottom of the stage quarrelling.) Mrs. B. (looking round.) [300]   But there is something wanting for me still: My dear Charlotte—
Charl. (coming forward and jumping into Mrs. B.'s arms.) Yes, I was just waiting for this. O! I shall love you, and live with you, and hang about you continually! My sister, my aunty, my cousin! how many names may I call you?
Mrs. B. As many as you please. But there is another name that you must learn to say: (leading her up to Balt.) do you think you can look gravely
[Page 107]
in this gentleman's face and call him uncle? Nay, don't be frightened at him. (to Balt.) Poor girl, she has stood in awe of you intolerably.
Balt. (embracing her.) She shall stand in awe of me no more; and, if ever I look sternly upon her again, I will cheerfully submit to whatever correction she may think proper to inflict upon me.
                                         (smiling significantly.) Char. (holding out his hand to Charlotte.) And is there no such thing as cousins to be made out of all this store of relationship.
Charl. O yes! there is a lazy, idle, good-for-nothing thing called a cousin, that we must all have some little kindness for, as in duty bound, notwithstanding.
Free. Don't mind her, my friend Charles: you shall be lazy and idle no longer. I'll find employment for you: I'll rouse you up and make a man of [325]   you. There is not a peer of the realm has it in his power to do more for his relations than I have. And by heaven I will do it too.
True. (laying his hand on Freeman's shoulder.) Gently now, my good Sir! we know all that perfectly well.
Balt. (aside to True.) O, let him boast now, he is entitled to it.
True. (aside to Balt. giving a nod of satisfaction.) Ay, all is well, I see. (aloud.) Now, my happy friends, if I have been of any use amongst you, shew me your gratitude by spending the rest of the
[Page 108]
day at my house, with my good friend the Vicar of Blackmorton; who has many things to tell you.
Mrs. Free. (aside to True.) As I am the elder brother's wife, the foolish ceremony of my taking precedence of Mrs. Baltimore will be settled accordingly; and I'm sure it will distress me extremely.
True. (aside to her.) Don't distress yourself, Madam; there is a bar to that, which you shall have the satisfaction of being acquainted with presently. Pray don't let your amiable delicacy distress you. (aloud.) Now let us leave this happy nook. But I am resolved to have a little bower erected in this very spot, where we will all sometimes retire, whenever we find any bad dispositions stirring within us, with that book in our hands, which says, “If [350]   thy brother offend thee seven times in a day”— No, no, no! I must not repeat sacred words with an unlicensed tongue: but I will bless God in silence for restoring a rational creature to the kindly feelings of humanity.
                                         (Exeunt. Back matter

THE END.
NOTES
1
1ST MOB
1ST TURN
2D MOB
2D TURN
ALD
ALL
BALT
BALTIMORE
BES
BOY
CHAR
CHARL
CHARLES
COACH
COM
COUNTRYMAN
CROUD
DAV
DAVID
FIRST MOB
FIRST VOTE
FIRST WOMAN
FREE
GIRL
GOV
HOUSEM
HOUSM
JEN
JENK
KEEP
LITTLE BOY
MAR
MARGERY
MR. FUDGE
MR. GRUB
MR. HASSOCK
MRS. B
MRS. BALT
MRS. BALTIMORE
MRS. F
MRS. FREE
MRS. FREEMAN
OLD WOMAN
PET
SAILOR
SECOND MOB
SECOND VOTE
SECOND WOMAN
SER
SERV
SIM
THIRD MOB
TRUE
TURN
VOTER

Title: The election (1798 (volume one), 1802 (volume two), 1812 (volume three))

Publication title: A Series Of Plays: in Which It Is Attempted To Delineate the Stronger Passions Of the Mind

Pages: 3 v.

Publication date: 1798 (volume one), 1802 (volume two), 1812 (volume three)

Publication year: 1798

Publisher/Imprint: Printed for ... T. Cadell ... and W. Davies

Physical description: [4 ] , 411, [1 ] p.

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: London

Publication subject: Literature

Source type: Book

Language of publication: English

Document type: Book, Comedy

Document note: The election.; Comedy.; Date first published: 1802.; Date first performed: Unknown or unacted.

Publication note: Preliminaries and introductory matter omitted; The following plays have been taken from this source:; From Vol. I; The Tryal: A Comedy; From Vol. II; The Election: A Comedy, In Five Acts; The Second Marriage: A Comedy. In Five Acts; From Vol. III; The Dream: A Tragedy, In Prose; The Siege: A Comedy, In Five Acts; .

Accession number: D0100058

ProQuest document ID: 2138579207

Document URL: http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/election-1798-volume-one-1802-two-1812-three/docview/2138579207/se-2?accountid=14270

Database: Literature Online

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2022 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions