____________________________________________________________

Enthusiasm (1836)

Author: Baillie, Joanna

Publication info: Dramas, By Joanna Baillie. In Three Volumes . 3 v. London: Printed for Longman, Rees, Orme, 1836.

http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/enthusiasm-1836/docview/2138575570/se-2?accountid=14270

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://temple-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/openurl/01TULI/TULI??url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;genre=book&amp;sid=ProQ:ProQ%3Aed&amp;atitle=&amp;title=Enthusiasm+%281836%29&amp;issn=&amp;date=1836-01-01&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;spage=321&amp;au=Baillie%2C+Joanna&amp;isbn=&amp;jtitle=&amp;btitle=Enthusiasm+%281836%29&amp;rft_id=info:eric/D0100059&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: [Page 321]
ENTHUSIASM: A COMEDY. IN THREE ACTS.
[Page 322]
Front matter 1 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Lord Worrymore.
Colonel Frankland.
Blount.
Sir John Crofton.
Clermont.
Hugh, a Boy.
Paterson, Servant of Colonel Frankland.
Manhaunslet, a German Vagrant.
Visiters, Servants, &c.
WOMEN. Lady Worrymore.
Lady Shrewdly.
Miss Frankland.
Mrs. Brown.
Barbara, the Attendant of Miss Frankland.
Visiters, Servants, &c.

[Page 323]
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. —A Saloon, with a Glass Door opening into a Garden in the bottom of the Stage. — Lord Worrymore and Lady Shrewdly are seen walking towards the House in earnest conversation, and enter by the said Door, speaking as they enter. LADY SHREWDLY. But, my dear Lord Worrymore, did you not know all this before you married her? and did you not admire the charming ardour of her character?
LORD WORRYMORE. Yes, Madam; for things worthy of that ardour did then engage her attention. The first time I beheld her,—I believe I have told you before.

[Page 324]
LADY SHREWDLY. True, my Lord; I have heard you say that the first time you beheld her was in the painting gallery of Mr. Rougeit, where she stood rivetted with admiration before the portrait of your Lordship; and that grace and expression attracted her at that moment, I am not disposed to question.
LORD WORRYMORE. Yes, my dear friend; and in poetry also, and the graver works of composition, nothing that was excellent escaped her. My speech upon the former Corn Bill delighted her: not an argument or happy expression in the whole that she could not repeat with a spirit and action appropriate. She had a sound taste for eloquence; nobody admired it like her.
LADY SHREWDLY. How should they? She must have had a capacity made on purpose to admire that speech; [25]   and a very rare one too, I assure you.
LORD WORRYMORE. Not a word or observation fell from my lips, but she understood the sense and spirit of it so quickly.
LADY SHREWDLY. Leaving any other listener far behind, I dare say.

[Page 325]
LORD WORRYMORE. And now, every learned oddity, every foolish coxcomb who has gathered up in the world but a shred of reputation for any thing, engrosses exclusively, for the time, her thoughts and admiration; and what I do, what I speak, what I write, is no more attended to, than if I had changed into a common-place person on her hands.
LADY SHREWDLY. And that is what change could never make your Lordship.
LORD WORRYMORE (bowing with affected modesty). To be sure, I then thought enthusiasm a very charming quality.
LADY SHREWDLY. But not very constant to its object, my Lord; you surely could not think that. You have had your turn, and should now with a better grace give up some portion of her admiration to the other sages, orators, and poets with which this happy metropolis abounds.
LORD WORRYMORE. Sages, orators, and poets, Lady Shrewdly! [50]   She has been tearing the clothes off her back in squeezing through the crowd of a city conventicle, to hear the long-winded sermons of a presbyterian
[Page 326]
parson. She has knocked up two sets of horses driving over the town after Italian improvisatori and German philosophers. Her boudoir is studded round with skulls like a charnel-house; and bold dirty creatures from St. Giles come into her very dressing-room, with their ricketty brats in their arms, to put their large mis-shapen heads under her inspection, as the future mighty geniuses of the land. Speaking birds, giraffes, and lectures upon Shakspeare have followed one another in succession, to say nothing of her present little imp of a juggler; and all in their turn are the sole occupiers of her ardent admiration. What a change! what a change for me! With my poor deceased Magdalene how different it was!
LADY SHREWDLY. To be sure, in the first Lady Worrymore's time it was very different; but you compared her, not long ago, to a dull foggy day in November, and the present to a bright morning in spring.
LORD WORRYMORE. So I did, so I did, my good cousin; but there [75]   are bright mornings in spring, when the wind blows from every point of the compass in the course of ten minutes, bringing sand, dust, and straws from every lane and corner, to blind one's
[Page 327]
poor eyes and annoy one. I am a miserable man! What can be done to reclaim her?
LADY SHREWDLY. Very little, I believe.
LORD WORRYMORE. Oh, oh!
LADY SHREWDLY. But do not despair; she may get tired of this hurricane of enthusiasm, after two or three tricks have been played upon her credulity.
LORD WORRYMORE. You think so.
LADY SHREWDLY. And it would not, perhaps, be amiss for you to lie by for a time, and make no more attempts to bring back her attention to your own merits. Or if you cannot forbear doing so, do it covertly.
LORD WORRYMORE. How covertly?
LADY SHREWDLY. Write another eloquent speech upon some approaching Parliamentary question, and let it be submitted to her criticism, as the composition of some young Irish orator of amazing genius, who has hitherto, from modesty, given silent votes in the house, and you will see how prodigiously she will be struck with the depth, the
[Page 328]
force, the brilliancy of the dear, delightful oration.
LORD WORRYMORE. [100]   Now, my dear good cousin, are you serious?
LADY SHREWDLY. Serious or not, I can think of nothing so likely to serve your ends, under the present untoward circumstances. But somebody is coming. Enter Blount. O, 'tis a gay young sailor returned from a three years' station in the Mediterranean.—You're welcome, dear Frank! let me see you as often as you can while you remain in town; it always gives me pleasure. Permit me to present Mr. Francis Blount to your Lordship: the son of an old friend and schoolfellow of mine.
LORD WORRYMORE. I am glad to have the honour of meeting any friend of yours; and hope he has returned safe and sound from the sabres of the Greek pirates.
BLOUNT. I boast of no honourable scars as yet, my Lord.
LORD WORRYMORE. All in good time, young gentleman.

[Page 329]
BLOUNT. Has your Ladyship any commands for Herefordshire?
LADY SHREWDLY. Are you going so soon?
BLOUNT. In a few days, I believe.
LADY SHREWDLY. What takes you there so soon? Your native place is changed since you left it; scarcely a family remains of the old set.
BLOUNT. Nay; my good aunt Hammond still holds her state in the old mansion-house, and Squire [125]   Gozling, with his pretty daughter, I suppose, is there still.
( Lady Shrewdly frowns to him significantly.) LORD WORRYMORE (smiling). You will find your bird flown from that nest, I believe.
BLOUNT. Is little Kate married?
LADY SHREWDLY. No, she is not; but Arabella—
BLOUNT. O, as to her, she is welcome to marry for me,
[Page 330]
as soon as she can find any wiseacre to have her.
LADY SHREWDLY (who has been frowning and making faces to him behind Lord Worrymore's back, but in vain.) Out upon thee, Frank, for a very spiteful creature! Thou hast paid thy devoirs to her, I dare say, and she has scorned such a stripling as thou wert at that time.
BLOUNT. My devoirs, to a dull formal prude, who spoke two words in half a day, and those uttered as slowly and deliberately as if she were reading them from the spelling-book!
LADY SHREWDLY. We must be at cross purposes now, surely; we are not speaking of the same lady.
LORD WORRYMORE. Don't mind it, Lady Shrewdly; it is clearly a mistake, and is of no consequence whatever.— I wish you good morning. Good morning, Sir.
                                         [Exit. LADY SHREWDLY. O Francis Blount! what hast thou done?
BLOUNT. Nothing very bad, I hope.

[Page 331]
LADY SHREWDLY. Didst thou not see me making faces to thee [150]   to stop thy foolish tongue?
BLOUNT. And how was I to know what all those grimaces were meant for, when ladies, now-a-days, twist their features all manner of ways, as I am told, for the sake of expression?
LADY SHREWDLY. Arabella Gozling, whom thou hast made so free with, is now the wife of Lord Worrymore, and a peeress of England.
BLOUNT (holding up his hands, and laughing heartily). Every man to his own fancy! This good peer must have admired her as the most prudent piece of still life that ever wore mantua and petticoat.
LADY SHREWDLY. Quite wrong again, friend; he married her as a high-toned, ardent enthusiast.
BLOUNT. When my grandmother links herself to a third husband, I may believe that he marries her as a round, dimpled Hebe of fifteen. An imaginative ardent enthusiast! How could the creature so transmogrify herself? ay, or think of such a change?

[Page 332]
LADY SHREWDLY. That, it must be owned, is difficult to explain.
BLOUNT. O, now I have it! She became tired of sitting in the corner unnoticed, and has heard no doubt of some lady captivating every heart by her lively and generous enthusiasm; so she has [175]   rushed from her tackle of footstools and decorum, like a brig cut from the stocks, and set herself afloat on the ocean of fashion. By my faith, and she has made a good cruise of it too!
LADY SHREWDLY. Perhaps your conjecture is not far from the truth.
BLOUNT. How came this goose of a lord to be taken in by it?
LADY SHREWDLY. By that which has taken in many, both lords and commoners, ere now;—his own obtrusive eagerness for praise, which had tired out everybody.
BLOUNT. And received this new stream of flattery like rain upon the parched sands of Araby.
LADY SHREWDLY. Even so: to say nothing of a wife lately dead, who would never say one civil thing of all the
[Page 333]
clever writings that his persevering talents produced.
BLOUNT. He must be a happy dog now, I think: up in the seventh heaven.
LADY SHREWDLY. Nay, nay! fallen from that exaltation deplorably. And if thou hast a mind, I'll engage thee in a plot to restore the poor man to some part of his lost felicity, and mortify his affected spouse at the same time. Canst thou put a Brutus-wig on thy head, and become a great orator for a season?
BLOUNT. [200]   Can I not? I have danced upon deck, ere now, with a turban on my head, as a sultana of the royal harem.
LADY SHREWDLY. Come, then; thou art just the man I want. Let us go to my closet, where we may concert the whole matter without interruption.                                          (As they are going off, he stops and laughs heartily.) What tickles your fancy so? Don't stop here.
BLOUNT. Methinks she is now before my eyes, this same ardent peeress who makes such commotion
[Page 334]
amongst you, seated on a high-legged drawing-room chair, the back of which she would not have touched on any account, for the ruffling of her pinched frill and collar. And when you showed her a butterfly or flower from the garden, and said, “Is not that beautiful?” she would draw herself up most precisely, and say, “I believe it is considered so.” (Laughing again.)
LADY SHREWDLY. Move on, foolish boy.
BLOUNT. She would not give her opinion, but with prudent reserve, on the merits of a beetle or a cock-chafer.
LADY SHREWDLY. Go, go!
BLOUNT. And that too was affectation; for she was a careless hoyden first of all, and took to sense and preciseness afterwards.
LADY SHREWDLY. Move on, I say. We are losing time here, [225]   and may be prevented.
                                         [Exeunt, she pushing him gently off the Stage, and he still continuing to laugh.
[Page 335]
SCENE II. Colonel Frankland's House. Enter Clermont, looking round as if disappointed. CLERMONT. No, she is not here. She is with her uncle, I suppose, reading to him some dull book or other —the Sportsman's Guide, or the plans of Marlborough's battles, as cheerfully and contentedly as if it were the most interesting story or poem that ever was written. Enter Miss Frankland. I have interrupted some pleasant reading, I'm afraid.
MISS FRANKLAND. Not at all: we have got to the end of our battles, and he is now teaching me to play chess.
CLERMONT. I have brought you a book that will delight you.
MISS FRANKLAND. Are you sure of that? I am no great admirer
[Page 336]
of poetry,—of what is called sentimental poetry, at least.
CLERMONT. Did you not like my friend's sonnets, which I brought you yesterday?
MISS FRANKLAND. O dear, no! I did not understand them.
CLERMONT. Surely some of the thoughts they express are beautiful and tender.
MISS FRANKLAND. I dare say they are; but why should beautiful thoughts be cramped up in such patterned shapes of versification,—all rule and difficulty? I have neither ear for the measure, nor quickness [25]   of comprehension for the meaning.
CLERMONT. Don't say so, Fanny. Neither ear nor comprehension are in fault with you.—I should rather fear—I should rather say—No matter!
MISS FRANKLAND. What would you say?
CLERMONT. Nothing.
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, a blush passes over your face. Were any of those sonnets written by yourself?

[Page 337]
CLERMONT. Not one of them, I assure you. I wish some of them were.
MISS FRANKLAND. Now I'm sure you have been writing something of the kind. I see it in your face.
CLERMONT. Well, then, since you guess so quickly, I confess that I have; but it shall never be put into your hands.
MISS FRANKLAND. O, do let me see it, Clermont! Give it me now.
CLERMONT. I have it not about me.
MISS FRANKLAND. Has any body seen it?
CLERMONT. Only one imprudent friend, who has mentioned it to Lady Worrymore.
MISS FRANKLAND. I'm sorry for it.
CLERMONT. Is it a great misfortune, that you should look so grave upon it? May I request to know—

[Page 338]
MISS FRANKLAND. Say nothing more about it: there is company [50]   at hand.
Enter Sir John Crofton. SIR JOHN. But not disagreeable company, I hope. If it be so, tell me frankly (looking significantly at them both), and I will retire.
CLERMONT. You are too well aware, Sir John, that your company is always agreeable.
MISS FRANKLAND. In this house I am sure it is.—And you arrive at a lucky moment, too; for I hear Lady Worrymore coming. Enter Lady Worrymore. Good morning, Lady Worrymore: how kind you are to call upon me, occupied as you are with so many objects of interest.
LADY WORRYMORE. Don't speak to me, dear creature.
SIR JOHN (to Lady Worrymore ). May I presume to say how—
LADY WORRYMORE. Don't speak to me, Sir John; where is pen
[Page 339]
and paper? (Running to a writing-table.) I must write immediately; I have been prevented by a hurry of engagements all the morning. (Sits down and writes very fast, speaking to them at the same time.) The sweet, heavenly creature! it is two long hours since I heard of him.
SIR JOHN (aside to Miss Frankland ). The juggling boy, I suppose, who is sick with eating plum cake.
LADY WORRYMORE (still writing as before). The dear little darling! and he leans his aching head on the pillow—with such languid softness—the 'kerchief twisted round it, too—no [75]   model for an artist was ever so beautiful!
SIR JOHN. Your Ladyship must have him painted so; and take care to keep him sick till the picture is finished.
LADY WORRYMORE. Unfeeling savage!
SIR JOHN. A little more cake will do the business.
LADY WORRYMORE. Don't speak to me. (Motioning him off with her hand, and muttering aloud as she looks over the note she has finished.) Let me know instantly—the
[Page 340]
health of the suffering angel— every minute particular since I saw him last. (Folds it up.) Who waits there? Enter a Servant. Give this to my servant; it is for the mistress of the house where Master Munhaunslet lodges. He must go with it immediately, and wait for an answer.
SERVANT (taking the note). And bring the answer here, my Lady?
LADY WORRYMORE. Yes.—No; to the exhibition of antiques in Piccadilly. No, no! to the lecture-room of Mr. Clutterbuck; there will be friends there almost as anxious as myself to hear how the little angel does.
SIR JOHN. Mr. Clutterbuck must be a superlative critic, indeed, to attract your Ladyship at so anxious a moment as the present.
LADY WORRYMORE. Have you not heard him? You are incapable [100]   of appreciating two lines of our immortal bard, if you have not attended Mr. Clutterbuck.
SIR JOHN. I am in very truth, then, an ignorant fellow; and so are you, Clermont, I believe.

[Page 341]
LADY WORRYMORE. Clermont! Have I the pleasure of beholding the writer of that beautiful sonnet, which has been mentioned to me with so much praise?
SIR JOHN (presenting Clermont ). A poet who will think himself honoured indeed by the notice of such a critic as Lady Worrymore.
LADY WORRYMORE. O no, Sir John! an ardent admirer of the Muses, but no critic.—To what a charming department of poetry, Mr. Clermont, you have devoted your pen! The sonnet!—the refined, the tender, the divine sonnet! O how it purifies and separates the mind from all commonness and meanness of Nature! Methinks the happy spirits in Elysium must converse with one another in sonnets.
SIR JOHN. What a happy time they must have of it, if they do!
CLERMONT. It is a new and bright fancy of your Ladyship's, and never entered my mundane imagination before.
LADY WORRYMORE. Has it not? O, I have worshipped Petrarch,
[Page 342]
[125]   dreamt of him, repeated in my sleep all his beautiful conceptions, till I have started from my couch in a paroxysm of delight!
SIR JOHN. Ah, Lady Worrymore! you should have lived some centuries earlier, and been the Laura of that impassioned poet yourself.
MISS FRANKLAND (aside to Sir John ). I wish she had, with all my heart.
LADY WORRYMORE. But I have not yet seen your sweet composition, Mr. Clermont; pray, pray, give it to me! this very moment—O this very moment! I die to peruse it! I am miserable till I see it! it will haunt my thoughts the whole day!
MISS FRANKLAND. Dear Lady Worrymore, will you shame the divine Mr. Clutterbuck's lecture so much as to think of it then?
LADY WORRYMORE. Ah! my dear Miss Frankland, you are too severe: Shakspeare should indeed be paramount to every thing. Dear Shakspeare! dear Petrarch! I doat on them both. (Looking at her watch.) Bless me! I am behind my time. Adieu, adieu! (To Clermont. ) And you will send me your sonnet? you will do me that
[Page 343]
honour? you will confer upon me that infinite obligation? Adieu, adieu!
                                         [Exit, hurrying off, and passing Blount without notice, who has entered towards the end of her rhapsody, and drawn himself up by the wall to let her pass.] BLOUNT (coming forward). It is best to reef one's sails when a hurricane [150]   is abroad.
SIR JOHN. Why did you not speak to her, Blount? She is your old acquaintance.
BLOUNT. I have known a lady called Miss Gozling, in whose presence I have stood undismayed; but I must take to my studies, I trow, before I accost my Lady Worrymore.
SIR JOHN. That is prudent, Frank; you are rather far behind in book-learning.
MISS FRANKLAND (glancing at Clermont ). And have not yet penned a sonnet, I believe.
BLOUNT. Faith, I don't know a sonnet from a roundelay; but I shall qualify myself to compose both very expertly, before I become a candidate for her favour.

[Page 344]
SIR JOHN. You look grave, Clermont.
CLERMONT. I confess you seem to me too severe on this lady. The ardour of her character very naturally betrays her into exaggerated expressions; but surely (glancing at Miss Frankland ) it is preferable to the cold decorum of insensibility or indifference.
BLOUNT. Of course, Clermont, this fine sonnet of yours is to be put into her fair hands.
CLERMONT. I shall put it under cover, and leave it at her door in the evening.
BLOUNT. [175]   It is out of your way; I am sailing on the right tack for that point; give the packet to my charge, and I will leave it at Worrymore House as I pass.
Enter a Servant. SERVANT. Colonel Frankland begs to have the honour of seeing the gentlemen in his dressing-room.
SIR JOHN. Does the gout still confine him up stairs?

[Page 345]
MISS FRANKLAND. Indeed it does; and it will be charitable in you all to sit with him as long as you can.
                                         [Exeunt Sir John, Clermont, and Blount. MISS FRANKLAND (alone, after a thoughtful pause). That he should be so taken in!—But is he so?—In some degree, I fear.—Perhaps it is only to vex me. (Walking up and down with a hurried step.) No, no! he is taken in.—Is he a vain, conceited man, and have I never discovered it till now?—It cannot be: he has read me many compositions of his friends; one of his own, scarcely ever.—Oh, oh! I wish there was not such a thing as a sonnet in the world!
Enter Barbara. BARBARA. The jelly is ready, Madam, that you mean to carry to the sick boy; and the carriage is waiting.
MISS FRANKLAND. I thank you, Barbara, for reminding me. Fetch my scarf, and we'll go.
BARBARA. You're very right, Ma'am, to look after him, for he's a poor peeping chit; and Lady Worrymore, his landlady tells me, will be the death of [200]   him.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 346]
SCENE III. A poor-looking Chamber, with a Sofa near the front of the Stage. Enter Mrs. Brown, with Hugho, whom she leads to the sofa, then lays him along, and spreads a shawl over him, and then takes a note from her pocket. HUGHO. Tank you, good moder. What is dat?
MRS. BROWN. Something to divert you, my dear;—a note from Lady Worrymore.
HUGHO. Someting to torment me.
MRS. BROWN. She is too good to you, indeed.
HUGHO. Not good—not good. I was well; she stuff me wid cream and comfeit, and make me sick, and now she leave me no rest in my sickness.
MRS. BROWN. Don't be disturbed, dear child; she won't
[Page 347]
come near you to-day. I bade the servant tell his lady not to come.
HUGHO. You speak message to him?
MRS. BROWN. To be sure I did. Lord help me! where was I to find time, and words, and spelling to write her an answer to all the particlers she axed to know about? I just bade him say to her that you were no better, and must not be disturbed.
HUGHO. She will disturb me de more, and call it comfort. O, dat ladies would leave off comforting!
MRS. BROWN. But there is one lady who is good and quiet, I'm sure, and does not torment you.
HUGHO. Ay, der is one, and she be very good.
MRS. BROWN. She sends you what is fit for you to take, and writes no notes at all.
HUGHO. [25]   I will dance, and play cup and ball to her, when I be well, and tell fader, when he returns, to take no money for it.
MRS. BROWN. And will fader do so, think you? It would
[Page 348]
be no misfortune to thee, poor thing, if he should never return.
Enter Miss Frankland, and steals on tiptoe to the back of the sofa. MISS FRANKLAND (speaking softly to Mrs. Brown ). He is resting, I see. I have brought the jelly, and will go away. (Retiring).
HUGHO. Who dere?
MRS. BROWN. Miss Frankling: but she is going away.
HUGHO. Not go, not go; good Miss Frankling!
                                         [ Mrs. Brown sets a chair for Miss Frankland by the sofa, and Hugho takes her hand and kisses it.] MISS FRANKLAND. Don't speak, Hugho: I go away if you do.
                                         [He raises his head, and nods to her without speaking.] MRS. BROWN. You start, Madam!
MISS FRANKLAND. That handkerchief round his head gives him a likeness I never observed before.

[Page 349]
MRS. BROWN. Them wandering foreigners, Madam, have no nightcaps: they are no better than savages in that and many other respects. (Pointing to the handkerchief on his head.) It is, to be sure, an unchristian-looking rag: I could scarcely bear to let him say his prayers in it.
                                         [A loud rap is heard at the street-door.] HUGHO (starting up in a fright). It is Lady Worrymore.
MISS FRANKLAND. Be quiet, poor child! I'll soon carry her away with me: she sha'n't tease you long.
Enter Lady Worrymore. LADY WORRYMORE (running up to the sofa, clasping her hands affectedly, and hanging over him). Lovely darling! O how I grieve to find you [50]   still so ill! What can I do to make you well?
HUGHO. Stay away: dat shall best make me well.
LADY WORRYMORE. Stay away! how can I do so, my angel, when I am so interested—so grieved? Nobody knows how much I grieve for him.

[Page 350]
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, a good many do, I should think; for you have been grieving all over the town.
LADY WORRYMORE. You little know: how could words express what I have felt for him? Look at the lovely creature! There is soul and beauty in every line of his countenance. Nay, don't frown at me, Hugho: if you are suffering I'll kiss away the pain. (Stoops and kisses him vehemently, while he struggles and pushes her off.)
MISS FRANKLAND. Do, Lady Worrymore, be quiet. You'll put the poor child into a fever.
LADY WORRYMORE (persevering). No, no! I will make him well: he must be well; for I have told Lady Tweedler, and Lady Cockup, and Miss Larden how beautiful he looks in his handkerchief turban; and they are all coming to see him.
HUGHO. O dear, dear! to be so tormented! I wish dat I was dead. (Bursting into tears.)
MRS. BROWN. Indeed, indeed, my Lady, your kindness is obstrepulous: the poor child will die of it.

[Page 351]
MISS FRANKLAND. Let me entreat you, Lady Worrymore, to leave [75]   him in peace; and forbid those ladies to come here. He will have a night-cap on his head presently, and then it will neither be worth your while nor theirs to come near him.
LADY WORRYMORE. What a heartless girl you are, Miss Frankland! how unfeeling! A night-cap on that pretty classical head! What would Mr. Palette say? what would our great sculptors say of such a proposal? They would call you a barbarian.
MISS FRANKLAND. Let them call me what they please; we have no right to torment the poor boy with our admiration. Do leave him in peace. See how he is weeping with vexation, and cannot get to sleep.
MRS. BROWN. Which is quite necessary, my Lady, as your Ladyship knows very well. Neither beast nor body can do without sleep, as my good old mistress used to say, and she was a very sensible woman.
LADY WORRYMORE. Well, then, be it so; since even such a creature as this is subject to the necessities of nature.
[Page 352]
But let me wipe his tears before I leave him, and cover him up close for repose. (Wiping his eyes with her pocket handkerchief, and going to arrange the shawl.) Bless me! what a covering is this for my darling! (Pulling it off, and taking a fine Indian shawl from her shoulders, which she spreads over him.) [100]   This is more worthy to enfold such a being; this will keep him better from the cold.—Sweet rest to you, my pretty Hugh! I must tear myself away.
                                         [Curtsies slightly to Miss Frankland, and hurries off. MRS. BROWN. She has left him a good shawl, howsomever; it will put a mint of money into his purse, when he has wit enough to dispose of it.
MISS FRANKLAND. You must not reckon upon that too securely.
Re-enter Lady Worrymore, and beckons Mrs. Brown, who goes to her apart. LADY WORRYMORE (aside to Mrs. Brown ). You need take no trouble about the shawl, you know; for my servant will call for it tomorrow.
                                         [Exit hastily. MISS FRANKLAND. Call for it to-morrow! The shawl, I suppose?

[Page 353]
MRS. BROWN. Yes; deuce take her generosity! kisses and sweet words are cheaper than shawls.
MISS FRANKLAND. I guessed as much; the mint of money won't come from that quarter.—Let us move a little to this corner, if you please. (Leads Mrs. Brown away from the sofa, more to the front.) What do you know of the man who brought him to England—this Manhaunslet? Do you think he is really his father?
MRS. BROWN. He says he is.
MISS FRANKLAND. Does he behave to him as if he were?
MRS. BROWN. He behaves to him as well as some fathers do to their children; and that is indifferent enough.
MISS FRANKLAND. Poor boy! indifferent enough, I fear.
MRS. BROWN. He had a monkey, when he first came, that [125]   danced on its hind legs, and played quarter-staff and them tricks; and I never knew which of them he liked best, Hugho or the ape: he gave them the same food, the same kind of fondling, and the same education.

[Page 354]
MISS FRANKLAND. Did you not tell me, a few minutes since, that the boy said his prayers?
MRS. BROWN. True, Madam; but he did so, because I told him he ought to do it, for all good boys did so.
MISS FRANKLAND. Did he pray in the German tongue?
MRS. BROWN. No; God forbid, Madam, that he should speak to his Creator in such a jargon as that!
MISS FRANKLAND. You taught him, then, what to say?
MRS. BROWN. To be sure I did, Madam; for, as I said before, the ape and him had both the same learning from that heathenish vagrant, Manhaunslet.
MISS FRANKLAND. And what has become of the ape?
MRS. BROWN. As soon as little Hugho was so admired by the gentry, as to be sent for to great folk's houses, to show off his balls and his dancing, and all them there pretty motions of his, he understood, somehow or other, that the monkey was not reckoned genteel, and so he sent him on his
[Page 355]
travels with another outlandish vagrant, to go to country fairs and the like.
MISS FRANKLAND. [150]   But what has become of Manhaunslet?
MRS. BROWN. I don't know, Madam.
MISS FRANKLAND. Did he ever mention his wife to you, or who was Hugho's mother?
MRS. BROWN. No, Madam.
MISS FRANKLAND. Did Hugho ever mention his mother?
MRS. BROWN. No, Madam.
MISS FRANKLAND. I thank you, Mrs. Brown. Take good care of the child. I'll see you soon again. (Going to the sofa.) He is in a sound sleep now. How strong that likeness is! even sleep seems to add to it.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 356]
ACT II. SCENE I. —The House of Colonel Frankland. He enters, with a letter in his hand, leaning on Paterson. Sits down in an easy chair, and sets about arranging books and papers on a table at the bottom of the Stage. COLONEL FRANKLAND (after looking at the letter). Let me again consider the request of this gay Baronet. (Muttering as he reads.) Disinterested attachment—only requests to be allowed to endeavour to gain her good opinion.— Yes, yes! the plea and pretensions of them all. The days of our life wear on, and every pleasant solace, after it has lulled and cheered us for a season, drops away.—I would rather have parted with her to William Clermont; but what course of events is ever fulfilled according to the foresight of our imagination? (Speaking in a louder voice, vehemently.) None! no, none!
PATERSON (advancing from the bottom). What is your pleasure, Sir?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. A thing which I never get, Paterson.

[Page 357]
PATERSON. I'm sure I do all I can to content your honour.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. So thou dost, my old friend; but thou canst not make Fortune do the same thing. Thou art an old soldier, Paterson, as well as myself: tell me, now, if thou wert ever at siege, battle, or even skirmish, in thy life, wherein every circumstance fell out as the general or commander had reckoned upon?
PATERSON. No, surely, your honour. But what is the [25]   head of a general good for, if it can do nothing but plan, and cannot turn every unforeseen accident that casts up, to the furtherance of his purpose some way or other?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Very true, my friend; and thou art teaching me a lesson without being aware of it.
PATERSON. I were a bold man, indeed, to pretend to do that to your honour knowingly.
COLONEL FRANKLAND (sighing deeply). I wish I had had some such teaching ten years ago. But no; I suppose it would have done me no good then.

[Page 358]
PATERSON. Ay; that was about the time when our young lady—
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Don't speak of that; I can't bear it.
PATERSON. I crave your honour's pardon; I might have known as much. But when you talk cheerily to me, I always, somehow or other, forget myself.
Enter Sir John Crofton, and Paterson retires. COLONEL FRANKLAND. Your servant, Sir John. You are, in the true etiquette of a lover, I see, somewhat before your time.
SIR JOHN. Call it not so, Colonel. What has made it etiquette to all, but the natural haste and ardour of real lovers? and of my pretensions to be considered as one of the last class, I hope in good time to convince you.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. [50]   Convince the lady, Sir John; and if the conviction should please her, I must be content. I will not thwart her inclinations.

[Page 359]
SIR JOHN. I thank you, my dear Sir, for this ready and hearty acquiescence in the first wish of my heart.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Nay; you rate my acquiescence somewhat beyond its real worth: it is neither ready nor hearty.
SIR JOHN. I am very sorry if my proposals to your niece do in any respect displease you, Colonel Frankland.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. They do me honour, Sir John, and displease me as little as any offer of the kind could have done, with one exception; for I will deal honestly with you.
SIR JOHN. I respect your sincerity, though it gives me the pain of knowing there is one whom you would have preferred to me.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. But it is a preference arising more from the partiality of my own feelings, than from any superior pretensions in the man.
SIR JOHN. I thank you for this candour, and will not conceal from you that I considered Clermont as
[Page 360]
an acceptable visiter in the family, which has made me hitherto conceal the nature of my feelings [75]   for your charming niece; but, seeing his mind become so suddenly engrossed with the blandishments of Lady Worrymore, I have thought myself at liberty to declare my secret sentiments.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Yes; I have had some intimation of it. (Starting from his chair, and walking lamely but rapidly across the floor.) Silly noodle!—foolish simpleton!—bewildered ninnyhammer! He had brains in his head once.
SIR JOHN. They are gone a wool-gathering for the present, at least.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And will return with a knotty handful of it for their pains.—O, the senseless gudgeon!
SIR JOHN. Senseless enough, it must be owned. I should have thought—
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Say no more upon this foolish subject.—There is a fair field before you, Sir John: win the lass, if you can, and then I will do my part, and strive to give up my comfort as resignedly as may be.

[Page 361]
Enter Miss Frankland. SIR JOHN (going eagerly up to her). How fortunate I am to see you thus, on the very first conversation I have presumed to hold with your uncle on the subject nearest to my heart! (Taking her hand, which she endeavours to pull away.)
MISS FRANKLAND. Your fortune, however, will be of short continuance, if my presence is concerned with it; [100]   for I only wished to see my uncle for one moment, as there is a person waiting for me, below stairs, on particular business.
SIR JOHN. Some milliner or shop-woman, I suppose, who can as well return to-morrow.
MISS FRANKLAND. And if it were so, I have no right to waste her time, whatever I may do with my own.— Good morning.
SIR JOHN (still endeavouring to detain her). Call it not waste. Nobody rates time so high as those who will go.
MISS FRANKLAND. And nobody rates it so low as those who will not.

[Page 362]
SIR JOHN. Let us compromise the difference, then. Stay here but one quarter of an hour, and I'll give you my word of honour to go at the end of it.
MISS FRANKLAND. Even that promise cannot detain me.
                                         [Exit hastily. COLONEL FRANKLAND. What did the saucy girl say to you just now, when she frowned so?
SIR JOHN (conceitedly). O! young ladies' frowns are like dreams, and must be interpreted by contraries.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Not those of Fanny Frankland, however; she frowns not on man, woman, or child, without being really displeased. This looks unpromising, Sir John.
SIR JOHN. Not a whit—not a whit, my dear Colonel. [125]   I have known a man refused by a fair mistress three times in the course of one little month, and married to her at the end of it.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Then let me freely tell you, Sir, that the wooer and the wooed were, in that case, worthy of one another.

[Page 363]
SIR JOHN. Your irony, my good Sir, is rather too severe. I don't pretend to be romantic; but in the sincerity and disinterestedness of my attachment to Miss Frankland, I hope you will do me the honour and the justice to place confidence.— I now take my leave, and I hope, with your permission, to repeat my visits.
                                         [Exit, Colonel Frankland bowing coldly to him. COLONEL FRANKLAND (alone). This won't do; no, it won't do.—O that the silly fellow should have allowed himself to be bewildered with the rhapsodies of such a fool as Lady Worrymore! Surely, writing verses must have some power of intoxication in it, and can turn a sensible man into a fool by some process of mental alchemy.—Thank God, I never had any personal experience of the matter!—I once tried to turn a few common expressions of civility into two couplets of metre, to please a dainty lady withal, but it would not do: so I e'en gave it up, and kept the little portion of mother-wit [150]   that Nature had bestowed upon me uninjured. Re-enter Miss Frankland. Art thou here again?
MISS FRANKLAND. I waited till I heard him go away.

[Page 364]
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And hast returned, with the curiosity of a very woman, to learn what he has been saying to me.
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, the vanity of a very woman has whispered in my ear, and informed me of all that already.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And was it welcome information?
MISS FRANKLAND. Not very.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. He has rank,—a fair character, as young men go in the world, and a moderately good fortune.
MISS FRANKLAND. He has those recommendations.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And is, moreover, free from the follies of poetry.—What sayest thou, then, to such a suitor?
MISS FRANKLAND. As long as you are not tired of me, dear uncle, I will not give up your society for that of any other man. And I feel, my dear Sir,— (taking his hand tenderly,) —I feel it sensibly and gratefully, that you are not tired of me yet.

[Page 365]
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Foolish child! tired of the only comfort I have on earth!
MISS FRANKLAND. Let us say no more, then, on this subject.— [175]   I came to speak to you of something else.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And I will listen to thee most willingly.
MISS FRANKLAND (with emotion). I thank you—I am going—I would not give you pain—I should not have ventured—
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What is the meaning of all these I's, and would not's, and should not's, and pauses, and pantings?
MISS FRANKLAND. Bear with me a moment. I shall be able to speak coherently by and by.
                                         [A pause, during which he looks earnestly in her face.] COLONEL FRANKLAND. Well, dear Fanny, what is it?
MISS FRANKLAND (in a hurried manner). Are you sure that your daughter left no child behind her?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Quite sure.—I am confident of it.—I have
[Page 366]
good reason to believe she did not.—Do not put racking thoughts into my head. What has tempted thee to tear open an ill-closed wound?
MISS FRANKLAND. Pardon the pain I give. A strong sense of duty compels me.—You are confident, you say, and on good reasons, that she left no child behind her.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Would not that Italian adventurer have informed a wealthy father-in-law that a child was born, and had survived its mother? Would such a plea for worldly purposes have been neglected? No, there could be no child; and, thank Heaven, [200]   there was none!—What can have put such fancies into thy head?
MISS FRANKLAND. I have seen a child to-day who strongly resembles my cousin.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Thou art too young to have any distinct recollection of her face.
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, but I have: it was so pleasant a face, and she was so good to me.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. It was a pleasant face. If I could remember
[Page 367]
her as she once was, and forget what she afterwards became, it would be a recollection worth all my wealth to purchase.
MISS FRANKLAND. Should you like to see this child?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. No, no, no! I could not bear it.
MISS FRANKLAND. He shall not, then, be brought to you; but I will often go and look at him myself. You will not be offended with that?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Thou wilt go often to look at him! Is the likeness then so strong?
MISS FRANKLAND. So strong, that in looking on him you would feel that Louisa, or such a woman as Louisa, must have been his mother.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Such a woman, an thou wilt.—What kind of forehead has this child?
MISS FRANKLAND. Somewhat broad and low.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. [225]   And the nose?

[Page 368]
MISS FRANKLAND. Rather short than long; and the nostrils on either side are curved so prettily, that they look like two little delicate shells.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Is it possible! This was the peculiarity in her face.
MISS FRANKLAND. You droop your head, dear uncle;—you tremble. Let me bring this child to you.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Not now,—not now.
MISS FRANKLAND. But you will, some other time.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Let me have a little respite.—To look on aught like her—like what she was—like the creature that played round my chair—that followed me—that—Out upon thee, Fanny Frankland! thou hast stirred up vain yearnings within me, and when I see him he will not be like her after all.
MISS FRANKLAND. And if he should not be so like as you expected, will you not befriend a poor helpless child, for even a slight resemblance?

[Page 369]
COLONEL FRANKLAND. I'll do what thou desirest, be it ever so slight.
MISS FRANKLAND. Thanks, dear uncle! Retire and compose yourself awhile. Let me lead you to your own room.
                                         [Exeunt, he leaning on her arm. SCENE II. Lady Shrewdly's Garden: the House seen in the side Scene. Enter from a walk, at the bottom of the Stage, Lady Worrymore and Clermont, speaking as they enter. LADY WORRYMORE. And then, again, can any thing be more beautiful than when, looking up to Juliet's window, he exclaims,—

“Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.” O how fine!—You are silent: don't you think so?
CLERMONT. There are many passages in the play which I admire more.

[Page 370]
LADY WORRYMORE. Nay, surely you admire it: positively you must. I doat upon it; and Mr. Clutterbuck says, no lover could have said any thing of his mistress so exquisitely impassioned—so finely imagined.
CLERMONT. I believe, indeed, no lover would have said any thing like it.
LADY WORRYMORE. And again, which is, perhaps, more exquisite still,—

“Two of the fairest stars in all the heavens,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Which, if her eyes were there, they in her head,
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
[25]   As daylight doth a lamp: her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright,
That birds would sing, and think it were not night!” Is not that impassioned? Is not that sublime?
CLERMONT. I dare not pretend to judge of what is so honoured by your ladyship's approbation. But you have stopped short at the only lines in the whole speech that appear to me, although with some degree of conceit, to express the natural feelings of a lover.
LADY WORRYMORE. Indeed! Repeat them, I pray.

[Page 371]
CLERMONT.
“O that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!” LADY WORRYMORE (in a drawling voice). Yes, to be sure, a common lover might have said something like that.—Mr. Clutterbuck took no notice of those lines.—But, positively, you must attend his lectures: you must, indeed. You cannot adore our immortal bard as you ought, without hearing Clutterbuck.— (Looking at her watch.) Bless me! how time flies!—I should, ere this, have been contemplating the divine lineaments of that Madonna.—You'll go with me, I hope?
CLERMONT. I am sorry it is not in my power; but allow me the honour of attending you to your carriage.
                                         [Exeunt, disappearing among the bushes, as Lady Shrewdly and Miss Frankland enter from the house.] MISS FRANKLAND. [50]   I see a lady and gentleman yonder; who are they?
LADY SHREWDLY. Only Lady Worrymore and Clermont.— They left me some time ago; and her carriage waits for her at the wicket: but, I suppose they
[Page 372]
have found it agreeable to take a sentimental saunter in the shrubbery.
MISS FRANKLAND. They have become mighty intimate. Who could have thought it?
LADY SHREWDLY. Vanity, as well as a city shower, occasions many strange acquaintances.
MISS FRANKLAND. But of a kind less transient. They do not part at the mouth of a shed or gateway, and meet again no more.
LADY SHREWDLY. Not always; but in the present instance the resemblance will hold good, even in this respect.
MISS FRANKLAND. I fear you deceive yourself.
LADY SHREWDLY. I believe I do not; but I will not be positive. You know Clermont better than I do.
MISS FRANKLAND. I thought I knew him; but I was mistaken.
Re-enter Clermont from the shrubbery, and bows to Miss Frankland without speaking. LADY SHREWDLY. You are grave, Mr. Clermont, and I trace
[Page 373]
pondering lines upon your brow; may one know what engages your serious contemplation?
MISS FRANKLAND. The composition, perhaps, of verses for the prettily-bound album of Lady Worrymore.
CLERMONT. [75]   A book that will not have the honour of being opened by a lady who dislikes poetry.
MISS FRANKLAND. Nay, a lady of such a character might read that book, I believe, with very little offence. But when its pages are enriched with your sonnet, Mr. Clermont, the case will no doubt be altered.
CLERMONT. And, taking that alteration for granted, this same lady will then very willingly abstain entirely from reading it.
MISS FRANKLAND. Most willingly; she will not even distrust your pretensions so much as to examine the fact.
CLERMONT. I believe so. Cards of invitation, billets from a gay baronet, perhaps, or letters from country relations, afford reading enough for a prudent young lady who knows so well how to keep
[Page 374]
imagination in subjection to plain common sense —Ay, that, I think, is the phrase for the paramount virtue you now so decidedly profess— plain common sense.
LADY SHREWDLY. A virtue, setting professions aside, of which there is mighty little in this garden at present, excepting some little scantlings that may, perhaps, belong to myself.—A truce with all this [100]   sparring! Cannot one person like poetry and another prose, as one likes moor-fowl and another mutton, without offence?
CLERMONT. No, not even so, Lady Shrewdly, if the moor-fowl be cooked by one's neighbour, and the mutton by one's self.
MISS FRANKLAND. And Mr. Clermont may add, that if the morsel of one's own cooking has been honoured by the approval of an epicurean palate, it were treason to dispute its superiority.
LADY SHREWDLY (putting her hand playfully to the lips of Miss Frankland ). No more of this, foolish child!—Go into the house, I beseech you, and look for my pocketbook, which I have left upon some table or other.

[Page 375]
MISS FRANKLAND. I do your bidding willingly.
                                         [Exit. LADY SHREWDLY. Mr. Clermont, when young people, like yourself and Miss Frankland, quarrel together, I take no account of it; but if one can do the other any service, propose the business just as freely as if they were the best friends in the world.
CLERMONT. Explain your meaning, Lady Shrewdly. Can I in any way be useful to Miss Frankland?
LADY SHREWDLY. You can; and I engage your services on her behalf.
CLERMONT. I thank you—I thank you most heartily.— [125]   But will she do so? Would not Sir John Crofton prove a more acceptable agent?—a more zealous one I defy him to be.
LADY SHREWDLY. No, no; it is a service he would never perform: not faithfully, I'm sure, standing, as it does, opposed to his own worldly designs.
CLERMONT. O tell me what it is, my dear Madam! I will do it most gladly.

[Page 376]
LADY SHREWDLY. Go to all the resorts of low foreigners about town, and find out, if possible, the German juggler called Manhaunslet.
CLERMONT. The father of the boy Lady Worrymore admires so much?
LADY SHREWDLY. The same.
CLERMONT. What can she possibly have to do with such a man as that?
LADY SHREWDLY. What very few indeed would think of doing.
CLERMONT. How so?—I beg pardon for questioning so closely.
LADY SHREWDLY. Indeed, you need not: it will bear to be questioned. She is seeking to strip herself of fortune and all its advantages, for the sake of justice and affection.
CLERMONT. Of justice and affection?
LADY SHREWDLY. In short, she has taken it into her head, from [150]   a strong resemblance, that that boy is the son of
[Page 377]
her unfortunate cousin, who died abroad some years ago, and, consequently, the grandchild of her uncle.
CLERMONT. Generous creature! I am sure her actions are poetry, let her taste and fancy be what they may.
LADY SHREWDLY. Yes, somewhat too romantic for Sir John's present views; so that we cannot trust the business to him.
CLERMONT. No, hang him! I'll do it myself: I'll set about it forthwith. There is not a gambling-house, spunging-house, nor night-cellar within the bills of mortality that shall be unsearched.
LADY SHREWDLY. You take it up so eagerly that I cannot doubt your diligence. Good bye, for the present: I must return into the house, and release her from searching for what she will not find.
                                         [Exit. CLERMONT. To foster a quarrel with me so capriciously and pettishly at such a conjuncture!—I understand her now.—She is a noble creature; but surely she might have done it less offensively.
                                         [Exit by the garden.
[Page 378]
SCENE III. The private Closet of Lord Worrymore. Enter his Lordship, with papers in his hand, followed by an Amanuensis. LORD WORRYMORE. Sit down at this table, and begin your task; and take good care to copy correctly the periods, the pauses, and the notes of admiration. Eloquence is wonderfully assisted in the reading by those little auxiliaries.
AMANUENSIS. I will, my Lord.
LORD WORRYMORE. And when you come to any very striking expressions, be sure to draw a line under them—so, (showing him how,) that the reader may do them justice, with a correspondent emphasis and elevation of voice.
AMANUENSIS. Certainly, my Lord: I shall mark all such passages as your Lordship may be pleased to point out.
LORD WORRYMORE. I should like you to mark also some passages of your own selecting: for an unlearned person
[Page 379]
of common capacity will be struck with real eloquence surprisingly. When the former Corn Bill was brought into the House, and I had prepared my speech,—
Enter Blount. BLOUNT. Your speech, my Lord?
LORD WORRYMORE. Yes, Blount: I am just telling this young person here how surprisingly my own attorney was struck with some passages which I read to him [25]   from my first speech on the Corn Laws; and a man, too, who has no more taste or cultivation than a coalheaver.
BLOUNT. I well believe it, my Lord. The want of both could never disqualify him from relishing the beauties of such a production.
LORD WORRYMORE. You have read it, then?
BLOUNT. I have heard of it. It was that effort of your genius, I understand, which helped to win the heart of Lady Worrymore.
LORD WORRYMORE (sighing). Ay, it was even so: in those happier days
[Page 380]
when her high-toned mind followed freely its own dictates; ere caprice and love of change had led it astray.
BLOUNT. Never mind; we shall bring it back again to as high tones as it ever uttered, and all upon the right string, too.
LORD WORRYMORE. And you think she will be charmed with this speech?
BLOUNT. My life upon it, she will be charmed beyond measure.
LORD WORRYMORE (with affected modesty). I think she will be reasonably pleased.
BLOUNT. No, faith! that won't serve our purpose at all: she must be charmed to a folly.
LORD WORRYMORE. Ha! ha! ha! thou art a cunning fellow, [50]   Blount; I'll get thee promoted in the navy for this. (Going to the writing table, and overlooking the Amanuensis, who is busy writing.) Let me see how far you have got.—Aha! within two words of the very passage. (Mutters to himself as he looks at the papers, and making gestures of declamation, very pompously.)

[Page 381]
BLOUNT (aside). What is the fool about?— (Aloud.) Some striking flowers of oratory, my Lord: one can see it by the fire of your eyes and the vehemence of your action. I am fortunate in witnessing the grace of your delivery: it is well for me to have a lesson.
LORD WORRYMORE. You shall judge, my friend! (Lifting the manuscript from the table, and putting himself in a dignified attitude as he reads.) “That grain which, by the hands of our own ploughmen, whistling in concert with the early lark, hath been deposited in the maternal bosom of our soil; that grain which hath waved in the gentle breezes of summer and of autumn, and fructified under the salubrious temperature of our native climate—” (looking to him for applause.)
BLOUNT. Very fine indeed! Such grain as that is too good for making quartern loaves of,—to be munched up by every dirty urchin that bawls about the streets.
LORD WORRYMORE (chuckling with delight). No, no! my argument does not lean that way.
BLOUNT. You do it injustice: it will lean any way.

[Page 382]
LORD WORRYMORE. [75]   I only meant to prove that the lords of the soil should be allowed to defend the produce of their soil from competition and depreciation.— And that passage pleases you?
BLOUNT. Pleases me! if I say, delights me, will you doubt of my sincerity? No, my Lord; I am sure you will not.
LORD WORRYMORE (with affected modesty). Why, I must frankly confess that I think it a tolerable specimen of parliamentary eloquence.— But here is something farther on, which has, perhaps, superior claims on your attention, if you will honour me with some portion of it.
BLOUNT. With it all, my dear Lord: can it possibly be better employed?
LORD WORRYMORE (spreading his right arm, and assuming dignity, as before). “I am free to confess, my Lords, that the fruits of the earth have been given by the bounty of Providence for the sustenance of man.”
BLOUNT. That, the noble lords will certainly assent to; and, so far, the speech must be effective.

[Page 383]
LORD WORRYMORE. But hear it out.—“The sustenance of man,” —mark ye now;—“the pot of the labourer; the oven of the cottager; the board of the marriage-feast, with all the fair faces surrounding it; the christening, and the merry-making; and even the sorrowful repast of those, who in the graves [100]   of their forefathers have deposited their dead;— yes, I am free to confess, my Lords, that there, on such occasions, should the healthful produce of our native fields be found in abundance. But would you have the repasts of England's valiant sons and lovely daughters drawn from foreign climes?—from fields unlike to those in which they have joyfully beheld the green blade shoot, and the poppy wave its gay head in the sun?— from fields barren to them of all dear associations and sympathies which are the nurture of the mind?—I will not wrong noble Lords so much as to suppose it.”
BLOUNT. If they can allow, after that, one penny loaf of foreign flour to thicken the pottage of a drover, they deserve to be choked with it themselves.
LORD WORRYMORE. Ha! ha! ha! it amuses me to see you take it up so heartily. Well, I love you the better for it; though you do express your thoughts in your own sailor-like fashion. I thought it would strike you.—And you must do it justice, my young
[Page 384]
friend; you must read it with emphasis and all appropriate action.
BLOUNT. Neither emphasis nor action shall be spared, depend upon it; but as to doing it justice, you [125]   know that is impossible.
LORD WORRYMORE. O! you are too flattering—too partial.
BLOUNT. But are you sure, my Lord, that Lady Worrymore has never heard any part of this speech before?—no morsel of it, dropping from your lips unguardedly?
LORD WORRYMORE. No: I have been too much offended with her of late to repeat to her one word of it. She does not even know that I have prepared a speech on the subject.
BLOUNT. A fortunate forbearance!
LORD WORRYMORE. And I reckoned, too, that her surprise would be the greater after its success in the House; as no doubt it would, had the measure been brought forward at the time that was appointed for it.
BLOUNT. Then all is safe.—There is a gentle knock at
[Page 385]
the door. Permit me. (Opens the door, and enter Lady Shrewdly, with a box in her hand.)
LADY SHREWDLY (looking round her). In busy preparation, I see.—And I, too, have been busy, and have found my way up the back staircase without meeting any body.—How do you get on?
LORD WORRYMORE. I assure your Ladyship we get on famously. I think our plot sure of success. None of the finer parts of the speech are lost upon this young man. He has a native taste, though uncultivated: [150]   he will do justice to them all.
LADY SHREWDLY. With the help of this wig, and a proper solemnity. (Taking a wig from the box, which she puts upon Blount's head.) There; who but must admire the sapient countenance of the great orator Mr. O'Honikin?—And has Clermont's sonnet been exchanged for the more precious gem of his lordship?
BLOUNT. I have taken care of that, and it is now in Lady Worrymore's own keeping, under promise that the sealed envelope is not to be opened till the reading hour.
LADY SHREWDLY. I'm glad of it. Adieu, then, till we meet at
[Page 386]
the place of trial, and, I trust, of triumph, my Lord. (Going.)
LORD WORRYMORE (preventing her). Nay, you must stay just to hear him read one of his favourite passages.
LADY SHREWDLY. I thank you very much; but I am in a particular hurry.
LORD WORRYMORE. Nay, nay; but a short passage, and I'll read it myself.
LADY SHREWDLY. Indeed, I am in a hurry.
LORD WORRYMORE. You must hear it. I'll detain you but a few moments. (Running her up to the wall, as she tries to make her escape.)
LADY SHREWDLY. Let me go, I beseech you: I hear Lady Worrymore coming.
                                         [Exit hastily, while he looks round in alarm. LORD WORRYMORE (listening). [175]   I hear nobody coming.
BLOUNT. It was but a trick to get away.

[Page 387]
LORD WORRYMORE. What a desperate haste she must be in! (Going to the table, and seeing the Amanuensis at a loss.) Write on, my friend: what's the matter?
AMANUENSIS. There's something wrong here.
LORD WORRYMORE. That's impossible.
AMANUENSIS. There must be a page wanting.
LORD WORRYMORE (examining the papers). Truly, so there is. I must have dropt it in the library.
                                         [Exit into the library. BLOUNT (aside, looking at the Amanuensis). Silly fellow, to mention such a discovery! It would have made as good sense without the page as with it.
LORD WORRYMORE (calling behind the scenes, from the library). Bring light here: I can see nothing.
                                         [Exit Amanuensis, carrying a light, and Blount following.
[Page 388]
SCENE IV. A narrow Ante-room or Hall; Servants seen crossing the Stage from opposite sides. FIRST SERVANT. Have you been listening, Tim? You seem mightily diverted.
SECOND SERVANT. I had no occasion to listen; for I contrived business for myself, as it were, and stole quietly into the room, and saw all the company, and the oration-man busy in his vocation: and hard work it is, I'll assure you.
FIRST SERVANT. Hard work! it is only words out of his mouth, is it not? A country curate would think nothing on't.
SECOND SERVANT. Only words out of his mouth, say ye? Both legs and arms are at work, like any weaver busy on the treadles: and for making of mouths, and grinning and staring under the curls of that blouzing wig of his, it's unpossible for me to gi' you any notion on 't. I would not undertake to supply either lords or ladies wi' such a turbullion
[Page 389]
of roaring, and thumping, and winnowing of arms, for a month's wages twice told. I've seen the stage doctor at Barth'lomew fair, but he is but a joke to it. Listen, man! you can hear him through the wall.
                                         ( Blount's voice heard without.) FIRST SERVANT (listening). Faith, so I do!—And how does my Lady take it?
SECOND SERVANT. [25]   Ay, she has nearly as hard work in admiring him, as he has with his eloquence, as they call it. Lord help her to a soberer way of commending folks, for her body's sake! She'll be in a fever by the evening.
FIRST SERVANT. Never mind that; she's an able-bodied person enough, for all that she casts up her eyes, and smells at her bottle of salts so often.—But here comes Mr. Clermont's Ned.
Enter a Third Servant. THIRD SERVANT. Is my master here?
SECOND SERVANT. Yes, but he came last of all the company: my Lady inquired for him twenty times over, before he appeared.

[Page 390]
FIRST SERVANT. What kept him so long, I wonder?
THIRD SERVANT. It was more wonderful that he got here at all.
FIRST SERVANT. How so?
THIRD SERVANT. He has been in all the raggamuffin places in London, after a raggamuffin foreigner.
SECOND SERVANT. And did he find him?
THIRD SERVANT. No; it was all labour lost. But I have just discovered where he is certainly to be found; and if you would let me into the room for a moment, that I may whisper it in his ear, I should be greatly obliged to thee, Tim.
SECOND SERVANT. Let ye into the room! Not till ye gi' me a [50]   good silver sixpence, I warrant ye.
THIRD SERVANT. A silver sixpence, for speaking to my own master!
SECOND SERVANT. Ay; and for seeing as good a show as any
[Page 391]
body ever paid half a crown to gape at.—List! list! he's roaring again.
                                         ( Blount's voice heard as before.) THIRD SERVANT. Well; I must speak to my master, be the cost what it may.
SECOND SERVANT. Come along, then.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE V. The grand Library: Blount is discovered standing on a platform, with a table before him and his MS. oration in his hand, surrounded by Lord and Lady Worrymore, Lady Shrewdly, Miss Frankland, Clermont, &c. &c., while a general murmur of applause is heard, as the scene opens. BLOUNT (in a low voice, as if much exhausted). Pardon me for a moment. (Takes a glass of water from the table and drinks it slowly.)
LADY WORRYMORE (running about from one person to another). LADY WORRYMORE. Was there ever any thing so eloquent?—Is it not sublime?—And you love poetry, Lady
[Page 392]
Tweedle; is it not poetical, too? A scholar like you, Mr. Clermont, must know how to appreciate its excellence.
SIR JOHN CROFTON. His learning were of little value else. Those who have studied Demosthenes and Cicero will know what to think of this, pretty accurately.
LADY WORRYMORE. I am delighted to hear you say so, Sir John. Demosthenes! Cicero! Oh, it makes my heart stir within me to hear those names pronounced! and those only who love their immortal works can do justice to the eloquence of Mr. O'Honikin.
LORD WORRYMORE (going up to them, rubbing his hands and chuckling). And you like it, Lady Worrymore?—And you like it, Sir John?—Both very right: he's a clever fellow; both very right. What do you say, Mr. Clermont?
CLERMONT. Every one is right to be pleased when he can.
LADY WORRYMORE. What an observation, applied to the fervour of our admiration!
LORD WORRYMORE (laying his hand soothingly on Clermont's arm). Don't be so grave, my dear Sir: have patience
[Page 393]
—have patience: your pretty sonnet will claim its own share of admiration presently. (Going with great complacency from one person to another.) [25]   I hope you like him?—I hope you like the speech. Very good; all very clever. At least, I am told so—it does not become me to speak.
LADY SHREWDLY (aside, pulling his sleeve). Have a care: you'll discover all with that false modesty.
LORD WORRYMORE (aside to Lady Shrewdly ). No, no! I'm cunning; I manage very well. (Aloud.) My Lady Worrymore, what did you think of that part about the Ploughman and the Lark, and the waving of the poppies?—very fine, was it not? No, no! I don't mean fine, neither; rather too fanciful.
LADY WORRYMORE. You are a cold critic, my Lord. It requires a kindred spirit with the writer's to admire such exquisite imagery.
LORD WORRYMORE. Very right; so it does, and you are akin to him, dear wife.
LADY WORRYMORE. Hush! he has recovered, and is going to resume.

[Page 394]
BLOUNT (after having sipped the water and rubbed his forehead with an affected languor, takes up his paper and proceeds). “I have now, my Lords—I mean, my honourable friends—put you in possession of the views, ideas, and opinions of a humble individual, who has cogitated on this momentous subject with a sincere, a pure, a vivid, an ardent desire to enlighten the understandings, to rouse the proper feelings, of others; and I am free to confess, that I feel it to be my duty, humble [50]   individual as I am: I feel it to be my duty, and am free to confess, that it will give me the most unfeigned delight and satisfaction, if I have but roused one spirit to its duty—warmed one bosom with the feelings which ought to be felt on such a momentous subject—loosened from the trammels of prejudice one intelligent, enlightened, and intellectual compatriot.” (Bows affectedly, and lays down the paper, whilst a murmur of applause fills the room.)
LADY WORRYMORE (to Clermont ). What a beautiful conclusion, Mr. Clermont! Can one say more of it than that it is worthy of the divine passages which preceded it?
CLERMONT. That is exactly what I should say of it, and I am glad it will satisfy your Ladyship.

[Page 395]
LADY WORRYMORE. O that word satisfy! I'll speak no more to you. (Running eagerly to Blount as he descends from the platform.) O my dear Mr. O'Honikin! you have laid us under eternal obligations. I shall now know what the ancient orators of Greece would have been, had they lived in our own times.
SIR JOHN CROFTON. And spoken upon the corn laws.
LORD WORRYMORE (with great pleasure and vivacity). And you are pleased, Sir John? And you are enchanted, Lady Worrymore?
LADY WORRYMORE. Yes; rather more so, I believe, than your Lordship.
LORD WORRYMORE. [75]   Very right; I find no fault with you for that, my Lady; it is right to be enchanted with a clever thing, let others feel as they may. Is it not, Miss Frankland? Is it not, Lady Tweedle? (Clapping Blount's shoulder.) O, my dear Orator! you have done your part to admiration: you have given such expression to my thoughts.
LADY WORRYMORE (to Blount ). What does he say?

[Page 396]
BLOUNT. That I—I—his Lordship does me the honour to say that I have given expression to his thoughts; graciously insinuating, that the poor ideas I have just delivered are akin to those which he himself entertains.
LADY WORRYMORE (contemptuously, and in a low voice to Blount ). Which are always akin to whatever he happens to hear last.
BLOUNT. And must, in this bright metropolis, find a goodly clan of relations.
LADY WORRYMORE. And, my dear Mr. O'Honikin! what alternations of humility and generous confidence! The humble individual, who feels it to be his duty to rouse to action, to warm with—How did it go?
BLOUNT. O, dear Lady, you make me blush!—To rouse to duty—warm to feeling—loosen from the trammels of prejudice my enlightened, intelligent, [100]   and intellectual compatriots. All that a humble individual like myself could possibly hope to achieve.

[Page 397]
LORD WORRYMORE. And has he not achieved it? has he not, my love?
LADY WORRYMORE (aside). What, is he here again!
LADY SHREWDLY (aside to Lord Worrymore ). Be quiet, my Lord, or you'll betray the whole.
LORD WORRYMORE (aside to Lady Shrewdly ). Well, well! I'm as quiet as a mouse.
LADY SHREWDLY. But you forget the sonnet, Lady Worrymore, in your admiration of the speech.
LADY WORRYMORE. I beg your pardon, Mr. Clermont; I beg a thousand pardons.
CLERMONT. One, Madam, is more than enough.
LADY WORRYMORE (taking a packet from her reticule). This most prized and precious packet. (Opening it and holding out a paper to Clermont. ) Pray, dear Sir, do you now occupy the seat of Mr. O'Honikin, and emparadise our souls with the effusions of your divine muse.

[Page 398]
CLERMONT. Pardon me, Madam; myself and my verses are utterly unworthy to occupy the place of such superlative predecessors.
LADY WORRYMORE. Nay, nay; you will read them yourself; no one else would give them their proper expression.
CLERMONT. Excuse me: excuse me.
BLOUNT. And excuse me, also, for presuming to offer my [125]   husky voice for that service which Mr. Clermont too modestly declines.
LADY WORRYMORE. How delightfully obliging! but I fear it will exhaust you too much.
LORD WORRYMORE (eagerly). Not a bit, not a bit! to it, dear Orator, and give us the sonnet, too.
BLOUNT (receiving the paper from Lady Worrymore: returns to the platform, and reads affectedly as before). SONNET TO A YOUNG LADY.
The pretty gadfly, sporting in the rays
   Of Sol's bright beams, is heedless of the pain
   The noble steed doth from its sting sustain.
On his arch'd neck and sleeky sides it plays.
[Page 399]

   Darting now here, now there, its pointed sting;
While he, impatient of the frequent smart,
Doth bound, and paw, and rear, and wince, and start,
   And scours across the plain.—But nought doth bring
Relief to his sharp torment:—So do I,
   Poor luckless wight! by Love's keen arrows gall'd,
From thee, my little pretty teazer-fly.
But, ah! in vain! there is in me no power
   To shake thee off; nor art thou ever pall'd
With this thy cruel sport, in ball-room, bank, or bower. LADY WORRYMORE. Delightful, delightful! I expected to be charmed with your sonnet, Mr. Clermont, but this outdoes all expectation.
CLERMONT. And all patience at the same time, Madam.
LADY WORRYMORE. Nay, don't let the modesty of genius suppose [150]   that we could possibly think it tedious. How delightful the lady must have been to whom that sonnet was addressed! A young lady, as the title gives notice.
CLERMONT. The younger the better, I'm sure, for receiving such verses.
LORD WORRYMORE. What does he say? Does his modesty shrink from praise?
CLERMONT. My Lord, I can suffer this no longer: so
[Page 400]
much honour thrust upon me, to which I have no pretensions, is—
LORD WORRYMORE (aside to Clermont ). Come this way, and receive a private word in your ear.
LADY SHREWDLY (aside to Lord Worrymore ). Let me speak to him, my Lord, and do you enjoy your secret triumph. (Draws Clermont away to a corner where she continues speaking to him in dumb show.)
LADY WORRYMORE. Was such beautiful poetry, with such a modest poet, ever yet combined?
SIR JOHN CROFTON. He blushed deeply, indeed: and, methinks, (fixing his eyes on Miss Frankland ) he has a fair friend here who sympathises with his modesty, if one may judge from the colour of her cheeks. Ah! when shall I receive such proofs of sympathy?
MISS FRANKLAND. When you blush at all, Sir John. You can scarcely expect from your friends this token of sympathy till you give them an opportunity.
BLOUNT. [175]   Yes, our poet blushed a little, I believe, as I
[Page 401]
read his verses; he was scarcely aware of their excellence.
LORD WORRYMORE. How should he; how should he? One makes but slight account of one's own. It is a pretty thing enough in its way; but you honour it too much, perhaps. He, he, he! (Chuckling and rubbing his hands.) Don't you think so, Lady Tweedle? Don't you think so, Miss Fussit? Don't you think so, my love?
LADY WORRYMORE (impatiently). You tread on my flounces, my Lord. Honour such a poem too much? it is impossible! I'll have a gadfly painted on my fan, and worship it.
ALL THE LADIES ( Miss Frankland excepted). So will I—so will we all.
BLOUNT. And what more will you do, dear ladies, to honour your divine poet?
LADY WORRYMORE. And our divine orator, too, Mr. O'Honikin.
LORD WORRYMORE. Crown their busts with laurels, my Lady Worrymore, with your own fair hands.
LADY WORRYMORE. Charming! that is the classical tribute which
[Page 402]
my heart pants to bestow. I would not live an hour without doing it, if I had but their busts and a garland.
LORD WORRYMORE. I'll find the busts this very evening, my love, if you'll find the laurels.
LADY WORRYMORE. [200]   Thank you, my Lord! How amiable it is in you to be so ready in honouring the merit of others! Let it then be so arranged, and this evening in the garden, before sunset, the tribute shall be paid; to which solemnity (curtseying around her) I bid ye all.
LORD WORRYMORE. Bravo, my dear wife! Done like a most courteous and graceful lady. He! he! he! I thought it would please you. Did you mark the last line of it, ending thus—“Ball-room, bank, and bower?” It cost the poet some trouble, no doubt, to find such alliteration as that.
BLOUNT. Unless it came by the Muse's inspiration, which is a convenient help for any poet, and saves the frail bark of his fancy a plaguy course of tacking. But you say nothing of the beginning of the piece, which shows such richness of expression:

[Page 403]

“The pretty gadfly, sporting in the rays
Of Sol's bright beams”— steeping, as it were, the brightness of the sun in his own brightness. This is what may be called supererogation or opulence of language.
LADY WORRYMORE. So it is: a most ingenious and judicious remark.
LORD WORRYMORE. You are a clever fellow, O'Honikin.
SIR JOHN CROFTON. As good a critic as an orator.
Enter a Servant, announcing something in dumb show. LORD WORRYMORE. [225]   Ay, there is some little refreshment, I suppose, in the next room. Pray do us the honour. (Offering his arm to a lady.)
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 404]
ACT III. SCENE I. — Colonel Frankland's House. Enter Miss Frankland, with a scarf or shawl on her shoulders, as if going out, meeting Barbara, who enters by the opposite side. BARBARA. Sir John Crofton is below, madam.
MISS FRANKLAND. And have you not told him that I am going out?
BARBARA. I did so, my dear lady; but what use is there in denying you to a gentleman who says he will return an hour hence, or an hour after that, or an hour after that again, should it be more convenient to you?
MISS FRANKLAND. Does he request to be admitted so earnestly?
BARBARA. Yes, indeed; and his requests are like the sails of a windmill, always returning.

[Page 405]
MISS FRANKLAND. Very likely, Barbara, when there is breeze enough to swell them.
BARBARA. How so, madam?
MISS FRANKLAND. You smile on him when he comes, perhaps, as if you would say, “My mistress is going out, but I know she will be pleased to see you, Sir John.”
BARBARA. Indeed, indeed, I did not, madam; and for any little presents he has given—I mean offered me, I scorn them as much as any body. But, I must needs own, madam, that I likes to see a genteel titled gentleman enter the house, who speaks to a poor servant cheerily, better than a [25]   grave stately Mr. Thingumy, who passes one as if one were the door-post.
MISS FRANKLAND. Don't be so discomposed, Barbara; I beg pardon if my suspicions wrong you. Be this as it may, I believe you wish me well.
BARBARA. Ay, that I do; I wish you well, and rich, and every thing that is good. And lady sounds better than mistress at any rate. I little thought, after serving you almost twenty years as dry-nurse,
[Page 406]
school-nurse, and own maid, to be but the attendant of a plain gentlewoman at last.
MISS FRANKLAND (laughing). For thy sake, then, I had better look out for a peer. However, since it must be, desire Sir John Crofton to come up stairs.                                          [Exit Barbara. It is an unpleasant moment, and I shrink from it, but the sooner it is over the better. Ay, and to settle the matter with a good grace for him, and without mortification to myself, it must be done quickly.
Enter Sir John Crofton. SIR JOHN. I thank you, Miss Frankland, for this condescension: five minutes of your company is precious when one cannot obtain more. But are you, indeed, obliged to go out?
MISS FRANKLAND. I really have business which obliges me to go.
SIR JOHN. And I have business (pardon me for calling it [50]   by that name) which requires you to stay. Will you honour me so far? (Setting chairs and sitting down by her.) Miss Frankland, there are situations which must plead a man's excuse
[Page 407]
for abruptness—for precipitancy—for—for— in short, you understand me. I see by the glance of her eye, that Miss Frankland understands me to be in the most awkward situation that a man of feeling can be placed in.
MISS FRANKLAND. And is it on that account the more likely to embarrass Sir John Crofton?
SIR JOHN. That sarcastic question does me the greatest injustice. (Laying his hand on his heart.) Could you read the real sentiments which are here embosomed, you would know how ardent, how disinterested, how unalterable is that attachment to your cruel self which you seem so inclined to sport with.
MISS FRANKLAND. In that case I should certainly know it, and regulate my gratitude accordingly.
SIR JOHN. What frigid formal words may come from the fairest lips on the most interesting subjects! Gratitude! Oh, Miss Frankland! you know that it is something far more precious than gratitude which I would gladly earn from you by [75]   the whole affections of my heart, the whole devotion of my life and of my fortune.

[Page 408]
MISS FRANKLAND. And if I can give you no more, your suit of course is at an end, and free to be preferred in some more worthy and favourable quarter.
SIR JOHN. O, do not say so! a more favourable, I painfully feel, may be easily found; a more worthy, never.
MISS FRANKLAND. You set upon me an imaginary value.
SIR JOHN. Call it not so: I repeat my words; and permit me to add, adorable girl, that where worth is, favour deserves to be waited for. Say, that in a fortnight hence, I may have some chance of subduing your reluctance.
MISS FRANKLAND (shaking her head). I cannot.
SIR JOHN. In a month, then?
MISS FRANKLAND (as before). That would make no difference.
SIR JOHN. Say two months, then—six months; ay, a whole year, if you can be so cruel as to withhold your consent to make me happy for so long a period.

[Page 409]
MISS FRANKLAND. That is a cruelty I shall never be guilty of.
SIR JOHN. You delight, you transport me! on my knees I thank you, most bewitching of creatures!
MISS FRANKLAND. Rise up, Sir John, and waste no thanks on so [100]   small an obligation; but hear me out. Withholding my consent is a cruelty, as you are pleased to call it, of which I shall never be guilty, since what will never be given, cannot be said to be withheld for any period.
SIR JOHN (rising from his knees angrily). Upon my honour, Miss Frankland, you are a practised angler, a very practised angler, no doubt; but do not think to hook a trout with bait that suits a gudgeon.
MISS FRANKLAND. You are angry, Sir John, and that admonishes me that I should be plain—that I should be honest.
SIR JOHN. Ay, very honest, no doubt. (Going hastily away, and returning.) Nay, nay, nay! I am not angry; and you shall be as honest as you will, but kind at the same time.

[Page 410]
MISS FRANKLAND. As you understand the word kind, the two are incompatible.
SIR JOHN. And how does Miss Frankland understand it, pray?
MISS FRANKLAND. That to put a speedy end to all suspense, even by a flat refusal, is kind in every thing that regards the affections; if I am not too presumptuous in supposing the present proposal to be a case of that nature.
SIR JOHN. [125]   Faith, it is at least one of an extraordinary nature, and may excuse all concerned with it from the common rules of ceremony and etiquette. (Crossing the floor, then returning with a conceited smile.) Pardon me, Miss Frankland; I feel myself still at liberty to watch for some more propitious moment.
MISS FRANKLAND. Your patience will be tired out ere you find it; and so will the patience of my friend (looking at her watch) , whom I promised to meet nearly half an hour ago.
                                         (Curtseying to Sir John, who retires tardily, and lays his hand on his heart as he disappears.)
[Page 411]
MISS FRANKLAND (alone). O self-conceit, self-conceit! how is the most downright person in the world, restrained by the common rules of society, to deal with thee? And if thou art the cause of perseverance, what shall we say of the high-lauded virtue of constancy?
Enter Lady Shrewdly. LADY SHREWDLY. Is it possible, Fanny Frankland? I could not have believed it.
MISS FRANKLAND. What is it that so thwarts your belief?
LADY SHREWDLY. That you should encourage the addresses of Sir John Crofton, because Clermont for a season was cajoled by the affected ardour of Lady Worrymore. You might have seen very well that he was ashamed of his sonnet, and enjoyed not the praises she lavished on it.
MISS FRANKLAND. And what puts it into your head that I have [150]   encouraged his addresses?
LADY SHREWDLY. I met him just now on the stairs, smiling to himself very knowingly, and when I asked him,
[Page 412]
with a significant look, how affairs prospered with him here, his answer was a nod of complacency, which wanted no words of explanation.
MISS FRANKLAND. I have given him as decided a refusal as my knowledge of civil language could provide me with.
LADY SHREWDLY. My poor simple creature! what dictionary in the world will furnish language sufficiently explicit to make a vain puppy understand that a woman will not have him? I should have understood his foolish smile better; pardon me, dear child.
MISS FRANKLAND. But it does not signify; he will understand it distinctly enough to-morrow without a dictionary's help, for I am convinced that our little boy is the son of poor Emma.
LADY SHREWDLY. We shall know that soon, for the German will be here to answer the questions of your uncle in a quarter of an hour. Clermont was indefatigable in finding him out.
MISS FRANKLAND. Was he?

[Page 413]
LADY SHREWDLY. Yes, he was; and why do you say this so [175]   languidly?
MISS FRANKLAND. To speak sincerely, then, I but half like his eagerness in helping to make me a poor woman.
LADY SHREWDLY. Fie, fie, Fanny Frankland! your heart is an unfit place for unworthy thoughts to harbour in.
MISS FRANKLAND. They sometimes harbour in better hearts than mine.
LADY SHREWDLY. Ay, they are subtle imps, that for a moment will find shelter anywhere; but they are quickly turned adrift, and have rest and entertainment only with the unworthy.
MISS FRANKLAND. I thank you! I thank you most gratefully, my dear Lady Shrewdly, for this friendly correction; I cast the base thought from my breast. I have given him cause by my petulance to suppose that I am not a fit companion for him, and therefore every thing particular between us is justly at an end. Why should I suppose that he has served me on this occasion from any but amiable motives?

[Page 414]
LADY SHREWDLY. Indeed you ought not to suppose it.
MISS FRANKLAND. Alas, my dear friend!
LADY SHREWDLY. Why that sigh?
MISS FRANKLAND. Do you know that I am afraid of myself?
LADY SHREWDLY. And why, dear child; of what are you afraid?
MISS FRANKLAND. [200]   I fear that, when I am comparatively poor, I sha'n't bear the neglect of the world and my own insignificance as I ought.
LADY SHREWDLY. Nay, that very fear is a voice from heaven for thy preservation.
MISS FRANKLAND. May it prove so! I feel I shall be supported in doing what is right; and feeling what is right may at length follow (raising her eyes to heaven) , if my humble sacrifice be accepted.
LADY SHREWDLY. And it will be accepted, my own honest girl! But you were going out, I know, and I will not
[Page 415]
detain you: pray permit me to get into the carriage with you, that I may enjoy your company the longer.
MISS FRANKLAND. You are very kind.
                                         [Exeunt arm in arm. SCENE II. Colonel Frankland's Apartment. Enter Paterson with books, which he lays upon a table, and then wheels his master's easy chair to its proper place. PATERSON (alone). Ay, this here book of maps has had a long rest in the old bookcase; I wonder what campaigns and battles he has got into his head now. Howsomever, it signifies little, so as they can keep his notions of his own constitution, as he calls it, and ill-formed gout and affection of the kidneys, and the Lord knows what! out of it.
Enter Colonel Frankland, leaning on his stick. COLONEL FRANKLAND (after seating himself, and looking at his hand). I think this stiffness in my joints must be
[Page 416]
somehow connected with this uneasy feeling in my back: dost thou not think so, Paterson? yet the doctor says it is not.
PATERSON. And should not he know best, sir? Lord bless your honour! my joints are stiff, as most old men's are; and my back aches often enough, God wot! but I never think of asking the doctor about it. Take a musket in your hand and pace about the gallery a bit, and I'll warrant your back will get better.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Thou'rt a rough physician, Paterson.
LAURIE. But a kind one, your honour, and that is more than can be said of some that are smoother.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Well, well; there's no changing thy nature, and I must e'en receive such sympathy as thou hast to give.
Enter Servant. SERVANT. [25]   The German foreigner is come, Sir, that you wished to see. Miss Frankland desired me to tell you.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Let him come to me here.

[Page 417]
SERVANT. And the little master too, sir?
COLONEL FRANKLAND (agitated). No, no! let him come by himself; Miss Frankland will look to the child.                                          [Exit Servant. Hast thou any notion, Paterson, what this outlandish fellow has been sent for?
PATERSON. I have a kind of notion, I know not how, about it. Does your honour wish me to leave the room?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Stay where thou art; I would rather have thee by me. Enter Manhaunslet. (To Manhaunslet. ) You are a foreigner, I understand, and have brought a little boy with you to this country.
MANHAUNSLET. Yes, hon'rable sur.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Is he your own son?
MANHAUNSLET. He be good as son to me.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. That is no direct answer. Tell me the honest
[Page 418]
truth, and whatever it may be, I will reward thee for it. And if you say what is false, I am not such a dunderhead but I shall find it out.
PATERSON. Ay; his honour will find you out, so you had [50]   better speak the plain truth at once.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. The boy, then, is not your own son; is he your relation?
MANHAUNSLET. Do not know.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Whose son is he?
MANHAUNSLET. Do not know.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Where was he born?
MANHAUNSLET. Do not know.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. How did he fall into your hands? Answer me plainly; don't hesitate.
PATERSON. Nay, your honour; he'll say “do not know” to that too. Just let him tell his story after his
[Page 419]
own fashion, and pick the truth out of it the best way you can. If it does not hang together, you can question him afterwards.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. I believe thou art right, Paterson. Tell me your story your own way, my friend. I have a curiosity to know how you came by the child, and I will pay you handsomely for satisfying it. And you need not be afraid of my taking the boy from you, till I have made you willing to part with him.
MANHAUNSLET. Der be eight years ago, dat I passed trou de small town in Bohemia, in de night. When in one moment de large inn house burst into flame, [75]   and somebody wid two long arms trowed de child out from window, which I did catch in my gaberdine.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And did you not learn what strangers were in the inn, and to whom he belonged?
MANHAUNSLET. One poor gentleman, who was taken ill in de house, and died of illness and of de burnings on dat night.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What countryman was he?

[Page 420]
MANHAUNSLET. Do not know.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What papers, clothes, or goods did he leave behind him?
MANHAUNSLET. All turned to cinder.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What clothes had the child upon him, when you caught him in your gaberdine?
MANHAUNSLET. One littel shirt.
LAURIE. Had it any letters marked upon it?
MANHAUNSLET. No.
LAURIE. Where is that shirt now?
MANHAUNSLET. It lie wid many oder rags to manure de cornfields of Bohemia.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And this is all you have to tell us of the boy?
MANHAUNSLET. Not all.

[Page 421]
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Tell me the rest, then, quickly.
MANHAUNSLET. Dere be no better boy for de tight rope, and [100]   de tumbling, and de jugglery, in all de worl: and he never telled no lie—no, not at all.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Hang the tight rope and the jugglery! Thou hast given him a notable education, no doubt; and a fine varlet he will be to receive into any family. So you have nothing more to tell me about the child?
MANHAUNSLET. Notting more.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. What a romantic visionary track that dear girl has pursued! Call her in, Paterson; I'll see the poor child now with more composure.                                          [Exit Paterson. He is profitable to you, I suppose?
MANHAUNSLET. He earn money for me; he is my living.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. I understand you, friend, and have no wish to do you any wrong.

[Page 422]
Enter Miss Frankland, leading Hugho, and followed by Mrs. Brown and Paterson. MISS FRANKLAND (advancing to her uncle with Hugho ). See, my dear uncle.
COLONEL FRANKLAND (starting from his seat). Very like; ay, very like, indeed. Look up, my pretty child; look in my face steadily.— Would I could certainly know who was thy mother!— (Turns away from him, and then returns and looks at him again.) —Be whose child thou may, thou art a creature worth cherishing. Give me thy hand. (Takes his hand and examines it.) The very form of her fingers and nails; they were particular. (Staggers back and sinks again into his chair, quite overcome.)
MISS FRANKLAND. [125]   My dear uncle, bear up cheerily. You see I have brought you what was well worth the bringing.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Thou hast indeed, dear Fanny; and for thy sake, were the resemblance less, he shall live as a child in my family, and be taken from his present way of life.

[Page 423]
MISS FRANKLAND. I thank you, dear uncle.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. We have no reasonable proof of his parentage.
MISS FRANKLAND. I know not what you have learnt from Mr. Manhaunslet; but if this statement from the Genoese ambassador, in answer to the queries of Clermont, agree with it, you will have something of evidence to rest on. (Offering him a paper.)
COLONEL FRANKLAND. Read it thyself; I cannot—no, don't read it; tell me the substance of it; that will suffice.
MISS FRANKLAND. It says that Madame Martoni became the mother of a boy a few weeks before her death, and that Martoni, with the child, left Italy the year after to go into Bohemia, but from that time was never heard of more.
COLONEL FRANKLAND (catching Hugho in his arms and kissing him). If thou art her boy—if thou art, indeed.— O, that I were assured of it!
MISS FRANKLAND. Mrs. Brown, you said something about a gold heart which you took from his neck.

[Page 424]
MRS. BROWN. Yes, madam, I put it up when he was sick, [150]   for I thought Lady Worrymore would lay her hands upon it.—Here it is. (Giving a locket to Miss Frankland, who shows it to the Colonel ).
MISS FRANKLAND. Do you know it, Sir?
COLONEL FRANKLAND (shaking his head). I do not. (To Manhaunslet. ) Was it on the child when you first found him?
MANHAUNSLET. It was rount his neck. It is ornament dat our women and oder countries' women do wear; de are sold in Italian and German fairs not greatly dear.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. It must be hollow; does it open?
MANHAUNSLET. Not open.
PATERSON. Let me look; perhaps it does. (Turning it round.) This little ornament may be a spring. (Presses and opens it.)
COLONEL FRANKLAND (eagerly). Hast thou found any thing?

[Page 425]
PATERSON. A small bit of paper enclosing this lock of hair. There, your honour.
COLONEL FRANKLAND (taking the paper from Paterson and reading). “A lock of my father's hair.” It is written in her own small hand, and this is the very lock which she cut from my head when—Oh, oh! and she loved me to the last, though she wounded me so grievously! (Embraces Hugho again and again, then crosses the room hastily.) Come to my room presently, Fanny, and bring the boy with thee.
                                         [Exit. MANHAUNSLET. Ha, Master Hugho! you be one gentleman [175]   now.
MRS. BROWN. And right glad to leave you, I think.
HUGHO. No, Dame Brown; he fed, he clothed me, and did beat me very seldom.
MRS. BROWN. Except when the monkey and thee quarrelled, and then he always took part with that odious brute.
MISS FRANKLAND. Say no more of this, good Mrs. Brown: let every thing unpleasant be forgotten. Colonel
[Page 426]
Frankland will settle every thing to your satisfaction. (To Paterson. ) Lead them to the housekeeper's room, and take good care of them both.
                                         [As Paterson is leading them away Hugho runs to them, kisses Mrs. Brown's hand, and gives his hand kindly to Manhaunslet. ] HUGHO. See you bote again: see you often, and glad of it.
MISS FRANKLAND. That is right, Hugho. And now you must come with me, and be a good child to your old grandfather.
HUGHO. And good boy to you always; to love you, and bide wid you, and do all your bidding. O! I will tumble, and juggle, and sing to you all day long, if you will. (Wrapping himself fondly in the skirt of her gown, and clinging to her as they go off.)
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 427]
SCENE III. Lord Worrymore's Garden. Two Busts, covered with linen, in the back-ground, and Company assembled, amongst whom are discovered Lord Worrymore, Lady Shrewdly, &c. &c. LORD WORRYMORE (to Servants). Move the busts this way; this is the best possible spot for them. [Servants move the busts on their pedestals to the front of the Stage.] She will be here in a moment. But where is Blount?
                                         (Retires amongst the crowd at the bottom of the Stage, whilst Lady Shrewdly and Sir John Crofton come forward.) SIR JOHN. So the fair lady has unseated herself with her own busy hands, and torn from her own brow all the grace and honours of an heiress?
LADY SHREWDLY. It has indeed been her own doing.
SIR JOHN. And a very foolish one, too: the age of romance has been long passed.

[Page 428]
LADY SHREWDLY. And will not be revived, I perceive, by Sir John Crofton.
SIR JOHN. No, faith! the world, as it stands, is good enough for me.
LADY SHREWDLY. I have the honour to agree with you entirely upon that point.
SIR JOHN. Find out a puny urchin to disinherit herself! —I have made a very narrow—I mean, any one who has thought of offering to her, has had a narrow escape.
LADY SHREWDLY. And if it be honourable, as well as narrow, you have reason to be pleased.
SIR JOHN. Did she know of this brat and his birthrights this morning when I saw her?
LADY SHREWDLY. [25]   She suspected it then; and the expression you wore on your face, as I passed you on the stair, of a favoured lover, showed me plainly enough that you did not.
SIR JOHN. Nay, Lady Shrewdly; you mistook that expression.

[Page 429]
LADY SHREWDLY. I should have understood it to mean, then, that you were not favoured.
SIR JOHN. When it is necessary that Lady Shrewdly should be informed of my private affairs, I shall have the honour to answer her queries.
LADY SHREWDLY. And when such information can reflect any credit upon Sir John Crofton, I presume he will deem it necessary. Enter Blount. Ha! Blount come at last: and not far behind comes Colonel Frankland and his niece.
Enter Colonel Frankland, leaning on Clermont and Miss Frankland; and Sir John Crofton, making them a distant bow, retires to the bottom of the Stage. COLONEL FRANKLAND. I thank thee, Clermont: thy arm makes a good support for an old man.
CLERMONT. And is one always at your service, my dear Sir.

[Page 430]
COLONEL FRANKLAND. I thank thee, my good fellow. Thou art as kind as ever, and as simple, too, methinks; but how comes it that thy bust, as they tell me, is to be crowned with laurel for that sonnet of thine, which Fanny, to say the honest truth, has not praised much.
LORD WORRYMORE (now advancing to the front, and overhearing them). [50]   How so? Not praised much. Ha! ha! ha! maiden prudery: just as it should be.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. It may be so; but she generally speaks as she thinks.
LORD WORRYMORE. Not praised it much! What faults does she find with it?
COLONEL FRANKLAND. There was something at the beginning, I forget what, which she said was very bad; and all that ball-room, bank, and bower business in the last line, she thinks is but wordy and cumbersome.
LORD WORRYMORE. Poo! poo! poo! all maiden prudery, Colonel. She will not—she will not be pleased with the poetry of a young fellow.

[Page 431]
COLONEL FRANKLAND. It may be so: and how comes he to have his bust made out so cleverly? To write rhymes one day, and be crowned for it the next, is marching quick-step time on the route of reputation. Enter Lady Worrymore, followed by her maid, carrying a basket with two laurel wreaths. But here comes the Lady Paramount, and Bestower of Reputation, who should be painted with a trumpet in her mouth, like my Lady Fame.
LORD WORRYMORE. And so she ought. When her mind is unwarped by prejudice, nobody knows so well where praise is due.
LADY WORRYMORE (looking round on the company, and bowing graciously). Most punctually assembled, and most welcome! [75]   I thank ye all, and beg your pardon for being so long in joining such friends; but, in truth, I could not be satisfied with the wreaths, which have been platted and unplatted, I don't know how often. And see there (pointing to the basket) ; they are not yet what I could wish. Laurels for this sublime circlet should have been fresher and brighter than our poor English climate
[Page 432]
did ever produce;—the myrtles for the other culled in the valley of Vaucluse itself. Indeed they are not worthy of their high destination.
LORD WORRYMORE. But from your fair hands, my Lady, is there either orator or poet who would not prize a garland of the simplest herbs?
BLOUNT. Yes, saintfoin, buttercups, or any thing.
LADY WORRYMORE. O, Mr. O'Honikin! could any one but yourself, undervaluing your own excellence, have talked of this touching solemnity! O dear! what shall I say? My heart pants within me! Tears are forcing their way into my eyes! (Laying one hand on her breast affectedly, and the other on her eyes.)
BLOUNT. (aside to Lady Shrewdly ). Forced work, indeed, I believe.
LORD WORRYMORE (to Lady Shrewdly ). She is really touched. This is very amiable, my dear cousin.
LADY SHREWDLY. Assuredly, my Lord, she has a true feeling of the honours belonging to genius.

[Page 433]
LADY WORRYMORE. [100]   You are right, my dear Lady Shrewdly: you understand me. O! did ever creature feel it so sensibly as I do! The very word genius sometimes makes me weep. (Putting her handkerchief to her eyes affectedly.)
LORD WORRYMORE. Well, my dear wife! it is very affecting; it almost brings tears into my own eyes. (Running from one person to another.) Is it not so?—Is it not very affecting?—Could almost cry myself. —Don't you feel it?—But come, my dear love! you delay the ceremony.
LADY WORRYMORE. It shall be delayed no longer.—Happy moment! sublime point of time! (Taking a wreath from the basket.) Thus, by an unworthy hand, is crowned the bust of personified Eloquence.
BLOUNT (to Miss Frankland ). Unveil that bust, fair lady: nothing but the hand of beauty, I suppose, must take part in such ministry.
                                         ( Miss Frankland removes the veil from one of the busts, as Lady Worrymore raises the garland to crown it, but starts back, uttering a faint cry, on perceiving it to be the bust of her lord.)
[Page 434]
LADY WORRYMORE. There is some mistake here. What a stupid blunder to bring this bust here, instead of the right one!
LORD WORRYMORE. Ha! ha! ha! it is the right one, dear lady! it is the right one.
LADY WORRYMORE. Do you think to persuade me, my Lord, that is not the very bust which was taken of yourself six months ago by Mr. Thumbit?
BLOUNT. [125]   And is not the bust taken of his Lordship six months ago very fit to receive the honour earned by a speech written by him, probably about the same period?
LADY WORRYMORE. Fie! fie! Mr. O'Honikin! to attempt to deceive me, and wrong yourself; to pluck the eagle's feathers from your own outstretched wings, to stick them in the pinions of a—
BLOUNT. Indeed, Madam, that very eloquent speech which I had the honour of reading to your Ladyship and this good company, is no more my own than this wig (taking off the wig) , which I owe to the bounty of Lady Shrewdly.

[Page 435]
LADY WORRYMORE (staring at him). Frank Blount of Herefordshire?
BLOUNT. The same, and your very humble servant.
LADY WORRYMORE. You were always full of nonsense and tricks; but this is past endurance.
BLOUNT. My dear Madam! can't you endure that the eloquence you have so ardently admired should belong to your own accomplished lord;—should be the produce, as one may say, of your own flesh and blood?
LORD WORRYMORE. Yes, my dear life! you must pardon both him and me: for, had you known the speech to be of my composition, you would not have done it [150]   justice, I fear.—Don't pout so, my dear! (in a soothing voice,) nay, don't pout. I like you for admiring what is good, let the author of it be who he may. He! he! he! he!
BLOUNT. And because the orator has received his due, must the poet go unhonoured? Mr. Clermont there is waiting to see his bust served with its garland also; and as there is no wig on his head, your Ladyship cannot be deceived in that quarter.

[Page 436]
LORD WORRYMORE. And ladies, you know, my love, are reckoned better judges of poetry than speeches; though the present company, I believe, will reckon you rather a capricious, than a bad judge of either.
LADY WORRYMORE (holding her head to one side, and assuming an air of diffidence). I feel,—what I ought to have acknowledged before,—that the tremour of my nerves has rendered me quite unfit, for the last twelve hours— O, much longer!—to judge of any thing. It is better for me to take care of my own fragile frame, than to concern myself with what is, perhaps, beyond the power of my poor capacity.
BLOUNT. Why, your Ladyship's capacity never showed itself more undoubtedly than on the present interesting occasion. Had you praised the speech which I had the honour of reading, as the composition of Lord Worrymore, the partiality of a [175]   wife might have been suspected.
LORD WORRYMORE. Very true, he! he! he! Well urged, Blount.— And now, Mr. Clermont, come nearer to us, and witness the honour conferred on the writer of the sonnet.—My dear love! where is the other wreath?

[Page 437]
BLOUNT (following Lady Worrymore, as she turns away moodily). Nay, my Lady, don't let the writer of that beautiful sonnet be curtailed of his honours, because of my delinquency. It were an insult to the whole nine Muses to send poetry away uncrowned, when prose has been so nobly rewarded.
CLERMONT. Pray, don't urge it. Her Ladyship, perhaps, thinks such poetry unworthy to be ranked with such prose; and we ought not to—
LADY WORRYMORE. By no means, Mr. Clermont; by no means. The merit of that beautiful sonnet cannot be affected in my estimation by any adventitious circumstances.
LORD WORRYMORE. That's right, Lady Worrymore; let every thing rest on its own merit, he! he! he! That is the golden rule to go by.
BLOUNT (as before). Now do you unveil that bust, Miss Frankland. Ha! you retire behind backs, and won't do it.— I'll do it myself, then, though I be but an unseemly
[Page 438]
[200]   minister in such elegancies. (Gives Lady Worrymore the wreath, and then, as she is raising it, uncovers the other bust of her Lord.) Put it on; put it on, my Lady. This is also the bust of the real poet who penned that delectable sonnet, and must not be defrauded of its due.
LADY WORRYMORE (dashing the wreath in his face). I can bear such provoking insults no longer.
BLOUNT. Devil take it! You have scratched my face with your twigs.
LADY WORRYMORE. I wish they had all been thorn and bramble for your sake. (Turns away indignantly.)
LADY SHREWDLY (following her soothingly). My dear Lady Worrymore! how can you take it so much to heart?
LADY WORRYMORE. And you too, Madam, have been in the plot against me. A very becoming occupation for a neighbour and a friend!
LADY SHREWDLY. My dear Ma'am! was it possible for us to
[Page 439]
suppose that we prepared for you any other than an agreeable surprise? You won the heart and hand of your dear Lord by sensibility to his merit; and has that merit become less dear to you, when the glory derived from it is reflected upon yourself?
LORD WORRYMORE (following Lady Shrewdly and Lady Worrymore ). Ay, very sensible; very well put, my good cousin. The glory is reflected on herself, and she casts it from her, like a spoilt child who likes [225]   every urchin's playthings better than his own. Come, come, dear life; you did think that sonnet a clever thing, and you do think it, I know you do.
LADY WORRYMORE. Keep that knowledge to yourself, then, my Lord; it will but make us both very absurd.
LORD WORRYMORE. Nay, nay, nay! (Following her to the bottom of the stage, speaking to her in dumb show till they disappear amongst the company there.)
CLERMONT (advancing to Miss Frankland, who is now returned to the front). You did not appear very sorry for my disappointment.
MISS FRANKLAND. It cost me few tears, I confess. And you
[Page 440]
take it composedly, too, considering how much enthusiastic admiration you have been deprived of at one stroke. But was there not really a sonnet of your writing sent to Lady Worrymore?
CLERMONT. I blush to say there was. But Blount's waggery has proved my friend. He gave her that written by her own husband in its stead.
MISS FRANKLAND. And what has become of it?
CLERMONT. It is burnt, gentle friend, and shall disturb you no more.
MISS FRANKLAND. And of what importance can it now be, whether I am disturbed by it or not?
CLERMONT. Of more importance than ever; since your good opinion is more necessary to my happiness than it has ever been before. I know the generosity of your feelings, which has stirred up a [250]   quarrel between us, that I might on your change of circumstances feel myself a free man, without reproach or censure. But you will not find it so easy to get rid of me, dear Fanny, as of your fortune.

[Page 441]
COLONEL FRANKLAND (who has been listening behind backs). And who says she has got rid of her fortune?
CLERMONT. I beg pardon, Colonel Frankland, for alluding to such matters; but you have now found an heir in your own descendant, and it is natural that it should be so.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And I'll wager a crown, now, you both wish to have it so, that you may make a romantic match of it, and live on that bare estate on the mountains of Cumberland. But I hate romance; and unless you make up your mind to have her with the half of my moveable property as her dowry, you sha'n't have her at all.
CLERMONT. My dear Sir, the boy is your grandchild.
COLONEL FRANKLAND. And if he were so ten times over, shall I ever suffer a little imp like him to be dearer to me than this generous girl? (Putting their hands together.) Now, keep ye good friends, and quarrel no more. And—but a truce to good advice at present; for here are our two bubbles of vanity returned again, inflated still [275]   with air enough to keep them buoyant on the
[Page 442]
whirlpool of vanity for months or years to come.
                                         ( Lord Worrymore and his Lady, hand-in-hand, advancing from the bottom of the stage.) LORD WORRYMORE. Give me joy, give me joy, my friends! Lady Worrymore has pardoned our frolic; and I believe there is nobody here, who will think less favourably of her taste and her judgment for the mistakes of this day.
LADY SHREWDLY. Assuredly not. A wife who has taste and capacity enough to admire the talents and genius of her own husband, is most happily endowed.
LORD WORRYMORE. Well said; he—he—he! very happily endowed. (To Lady Worrymore. ) Don't you think so, my love?
LADY WORRYMORE (gravely and demurely). I suppose she will be reckoned so.
                                         [Scene closes. NOTES
1
ALL THE LADIES
AMANUENSIS
BARBARA
BLOUNT
CLERMONT
COLONEL FRANKLAND
FIRST SERVANT
HUGHO
LADY SHREWDLY
LADY WORRYMORE
LAURIE
LORD WORRYMORE
MANHAUNSLET
MISS FRANKLAND
MRS. BROWN
PATERSON
SECOND SERVANT
SERVANT
SIR JOHN
SIR JOHN CROFTON
THIRD SERVANT

Title: Enthusiasm (1836)

Publication title: Dramas, By Joanna Baillie. In Three Volumes

Pages: 3 v.

Publication date: 1836

Publication year: 1836

Publisher/Imprint: Printed for Longman, Rees, Orme

Physical description: 3 v.

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: London

Publication subject: Literature

Source type: Book

Language of publication: English

Document type: Book, Comedy

Document note: Enthusiasm.; Comedy.; Date first published: 1836.; Date first performed: Unknown or unacted.

Publication note: Preliminaries and introductory matter omitted; The following plays have been taken from this source:; From Vol. I; The Alienated Manor: a comedy. In five acts; From Vol. II; The Stripling: a tragedy. In five acts. Written in prose; Enthusiasm: a comedy. In three acts; From Vol. III; Witchcraft: a tragedy in prose. In five acts; The Homicide: a tragedy in prose, with occasional passages of verse. In three acts; The Match: a comedy. In three acts; .

Accession number: D0100059

ProQuest document ID: 2138575570

Document URL: http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/enthusiasm-1836/docview/2138575570/se-2?accountid=14270

Database: Literature Online

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2022 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions