____________________________________________________________

The homicide (1836)

Author: Baillie, Joanna

Publication info: Dramas, By Joanna Baillie. In Three Volumes . 3 v. London: Printed for Longman, Rees, Orme, 1836.

http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/homicide-1836/docview/2138577274/se-2?accountid=14270

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://temple-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/openurl/01TULI/TULI??url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;genre=book&amp;sid=ProQ:ProQ%3Aed&amp;atitle=&amp;title=The+homicide+%281836%29&amp;issn=&amp;date=1836-01-01&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;spage=167&amp;au=Baillie%2C+Joanna&amp;isbn=&amp;jtitle=&amp;btitle=The+homicide+%281836%29&amp;rft_id=info:eric/D0100060&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY IN PROSE, WITH OCCASIONAL PASSAGES OF VERSE. IN THREE ACTS.
[Page ]
Front matter 1 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Claudien, a Danish Nobleman.
Van Maurice, his Friend.
Baron Hartman, a near Relation of Van Maurice.
Kranzberg, a Citizen of Lubeck, related to Van Maurice and Hartman.
Ardusoffe, Advocate.
Borion, Advocate.
Corman, Confidential Servant to Kranzberg.
Judges, Confessors, Officers of Justice, Mariners, &c. &c.
WOMEN. Rosella, Sister to Van Maurice.
Margaret, her confidential and domestic Friend.
Scene, the free Imperial City of Lubeck, and at Sea.
[Page 167]
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. —An Ante-chamber in the House of Van Maurice. Enter Baron Hartman and Margaret, by different sides. HARTMAN. Good morning, fair Margaret! I come to have the felicity of half an hour's conversation with Rosella. I hope this will prove to her, as well as myself, the most agreeable way of receiving an answer to the billet which I had the honour to send her this morning.
MARGARET. Indeed, honoured Sir, she is in no spirits to receive company at present, and wishes to be alone.
HARTMAN. Ha! she is considering of it then. It is indeed a serious consideration; but after the favour —I may indeed call it so—the condescension
[Page 168]
at least with which she has received my devoted attentions, I might fairly have supposed that a short time would have sufficed for the ceremony of consideration.
MARGARET. I believe, Baron, that ceremony, as you are pleased to term it, has been gone through already. At least, I believe, this billet which she desired me to put into your own hands, along with this case of jewels, will convince you that further consideration were needless. I was just going to your house to deliver them to you.
HARTMAN. What does she mean? return my present!
MARGARET. [25]   The letter will, no doubt, explain it.
HARTMAN (snatches the letter, opens it with agitation, reading it half aloud and half to himself). “Only friendship to return for all.—Pleasure in your society as a neighbour and a kinsman.— Beg of you to accept my grateful acknowledgments.” What is all this? Would she prolong the fooling of attendance another half year? Let her beware how she sports with devoted affection like mine. (Walks to and fro somewhat disturbed, then returns to Margaret. ) I understand all this well enough. Let me find her in her own apartment.

[Page 169]
MARGARET (preventing him as he endeavours to pass on). Nay, Sir, you must not.
HARTMAN. Foolish girl! I know thy fair friend better than thou dost. Let me pass to her apartment, and I'll soon make her glowing lips contradict the cold words of her letter.
MARGARET. Indeed, Baron Hartman, you must not pass.
HARTMAN. Why so? Nonsensical mummery!
MARGARET. She wishes to be alone.
HARTMAN. Alone! wishes to be alone! that is not her usual inclination. What is the matter?
MARGARET. She is indisposed, and can see no one. And I must take the liberty to say that you are deluding yourself when you mistake that cheerful gaiety of her manner, which is natural to her, [50]   for a proof of partiality to your company.
HARTMAN. If what you say be true, young mistress,—if this answer of hers be a serious one, I have not deluded myself, but she has deluded me.

[Page 170]
MARGARET. Then every pleasant man of her acquaintance might say the same thing, for she is cheerful and affable with them all.
HARTMAN. No, madam; affable and cheerful as you please, but she has not demeaned herself towards them as she has done towards me: and I will know the cause why I am so treated, before another hour passes over my head.
                                         (Going.) MARGARET. But you will be pleased to take this with you, Baron. (Offering him the case of jewels, which he casts from him indignantly.)
HARTMAN. Let any jilt in Lubeck wear the paltry baubles for me.
                                         [Exit. MARGARET (alone). The vanity of that man is unconquerable; and yet I cannot help pitying him a little; for Rosella, to conceal her betrothment to Claudien, has amused herself with his folly too long. (Picking up the case.) I must keep these rich jewels carefully, however, and restore them to him at a more favourable moment.
                                         [Exit.
[Page 171]
SCENE II. The Apartment of Rosella. She is discovered sitting by a table writing, and Claudien standing behind her chair, overlooking her as she writes. CLAUDIEN.
That pretty hand, and those fair characters
So delicate! they should alone express
Words of a sweet and sisterly affection,—
Words of the dearer tenderness of love.
Have done with cold notes of formality;
Let Marg'ret henceforth write such things as those. (Lifting her hand from the paper and caressing it.)
No, this white hand, this soft, this delicate hand,
As delicate as if the early dew
Dropp'd from the lily's bell or hawthorn's blossom,
A fresh collection of all summer sweetness,
Had been its daily unguent, it is mine;
Thou'st given it to me; ay, and it shall write
To me, to me alone, when I am gone.
[Page 172]
ROSELLA.
A wise precaution, mask'd with seeming love.
When I shall think of nobody but thee,
I might, perhaps, betray our secret bond,
Beginning thus to some old gouty kinsman
A dull epistle—“My dear Claudien.” CLAUDIEN.
Alas, that secret, that constraining secret!
It is a galling weight about our necks,
Would we were rid of it! ROSELLA.
But when the king of Denmark, thy good master,
Shall know how thou art circumstanced, he surely
Will not enforce upon thee an alliance
[25]   Unsought by thee, now thought of with repugnance,
Because he did at first, on thy behalf,
Propose it to the parent of the maid,—
A maid thou'st scarcely seen, and never woo'd? CLAUDIEN.
I trust he will not, and should lose no time
In reaching Copenhagen ere the court
Remove to Elsineur, that speedily
I may return to thee, my sweet Rosella,
A free and happy man. ROSELLA.
A free man, say'st thou, Claudien?
[Page 173]
CLAUDIEN.
Yes, gentle mistress, for the bonds of love
Are very freedom, or are something better.
Still, to protect thee from all harm, to be
Near to thee always; sit by thee unchidden—
Read to thee pleasant tales—look in thy face,
And, all thy smiles and meaning glances scanning,
To do what they desire—will this be thraldom?
Will this be servitude? ROSELLA.
Ah, no! that is not servitude from which,
When tired of it, thou wilt break loose, my friend. CLAUDIEN.
And so I will, my love, when thou art tiresome,
But when will that be; say? ROSELLA.
E'en when thou see'st what thou may'st shortly find,
A face to gaze on, fairer than Rosella's. CLAUDIEN.
Be not offended; such a one already
[50]   I've seen, and yet the latchet of thy shoe
I'd rather tie and have one smile of thanks,
Than press a score of kisses on her lips. ROSELLA.
She may be also wittier than me.
[Page 174]
CLAUDIEN.
And pardon me again; that may be possible;
Yet would I rather hear thy cheerful voice
Bidding me a good morrow, faith and truth!
Than all her wit and wisdom, were she learn'd
As Gottenburgh professor. ROSELLA.
Fy on thee, Claudien! Would'st thou then insinuate
That I am not thy reasonable choice,
But one that has been fasten'd on thy fancy
By spells of witchcraft? CLAUDIEN.
Thou hast it, love; by very spells of witchcraft;
For how could that be reasonable choice
Which no deliberation knew. Thy countenance,
Such as it is—thy joyous playful countenance,
I look'd upon, and look'd upon again,
Till I became a fascinated thing,
As helpless as an infant. ROSELLA.
Alas, poor child! this was a sudden change. CLAUDIEN.
Nay, I am wrong; it was not quite so sudden;
For after I had seen thy face, I waited—
Waited with eager ears to hear thy voice,
And then I watch'd thee to observe thy movements,
[Page 175]

[75]   Light step and graceful gesture—then I waited
To hear thy voice again, and then— ROSELLA.
                                         I pray thee
Have done with such a foolish list of thens!
Dost thou forget thou hast already won me?
I'll have thee presently, I do suppose,
Repeating all thy courtship o'er again,
And kneeling at my feet for perfect idleness. CLAUDIEN.
And so thou shalt, were't only for the pleasure
Of being raised again by that white hand.                                          (Kneeling to her playfully.) ROSELLA. (laying her hand upon his head).
It will not raise thee up, thou saucy mimic!
But keep thee down, for this thy mock humility,
Which is but vanity in cloak and vizard;
The bearing of success without misgiving
Or fear of change; the full security
Of an affianced lord. Enter Baron Hartman behind. CLAUDIEN.
                                         To keep me down,
Whilst thy soft fingers, mixing with my hair,
Gives thrilling so delightful! on such terms,
I'd gladly at thy feet kneel by the hour,
So to be mortified—
[Page 176]
HARTMAN. (rushing forward).
                                         Oh, woman, woman! [ Claudien starts up from the feet of his Mistress, and both seem surprised and embarrassed.] ROSELLA. Baron Hartman here!
HARTMAN. Yes, madam; and, as I perceive, not altogether welcome.
ROSELLA. [100]   In this place and at this hour, Baron!
HARTMAN. An injured man, madam, regards not time or place. As a near kinsman, had there been no other plea, I might have been admitted for one half hour into your presence, to know the cause why, after such long and well-received attentions, I am now to be discarded from your favour. But this, forsooth, could not be: you were indisposed; you were alone, and wished to be alone. I have, no doubt, grievously offended in breaking thus upon the privacy of one who loves so very much to be alone.
CLAUDIEN. Truly, Baron, I have, like yourself, come unbidden into this lady's presence, and have cast myself at her feet, as you have witnessed; for
[Page 177]
which humiliation she has only rewarded me with mocking: had you done the same, Baron, you would, perhaps, have fared no better.
HARTMAN. Count Claudien, the freedom of a careless stranger may be some excuse for your intrusion here, but can be none for her excluding me on pretences so frivolous; for the alleged indisposition is, I perceive, only the being indisposed for my company, who am an old and faithful friend; ay, and her kinsman to boot.
CLAUDIEN. [125]   My noble baron, you and I are rivals, and rest our pretensions here on very different foundations; you on being known to the lady, I on the reverse. But I am the wiser of the two.
HARTMAN. How so, I pray?
CLAUDIEN. Is it not a notorious fact, that strangers of any apparent likelihood always occupy the vantage ground in every woman's favour? Had the fair Rosella known me as long as she has known you, she might have discovered in me as many faults, perhaps, as would have excluded me from the very threshold of her vestibule.
ROSELLA. So you see, my dear cousin, that the wisest
[Page 178]
thing you can do, is to leave the count and me time enough to discover how foolish we both are.
HARTMAN. The wisest thing I can do, madam, is to forget and despise the heartless caprice of a fickle, fantastical beauty.
ROSELLA. Be wise, then, good cousin, since you have found out the way.
HARTMAN. Heartless woman! canst thou treat with such levity the misery thou hast occasioned?
ROSELLA. O pardon me, my dear Hartman! thou takest this matter more deeply than I dreamt of. Think [150]   not so severely of me; if I have erred, lend me of thine own generosity some further credit on thy good opinion, and I will redeem it. Have you not always known me as your gay and thoughtless cousin? and why will you tax me now as a grave and prudent dame? Come to me to-morrow; I shall then have seen my brother, and will talk to you seriously on a subject which to-day I would avoid.
HARTMAN. At what hour shall I meet you?

[Page 179]
ROSELLA. Not at an early hour.—At noon.—No, not so soon.—In the afternoon—in the evening: that will suit me best.
HARTMAN. Well, since it must be deferred so long, let the evening be the time. But remember, madam, I will submit no longer to be the sport of female caprice. If this gay stranger takes such treatment more lightly, he is of a different temperament, perhaps, and it may agree with him; but it will not pass with Baron Hartman.
                                         [Exit, proudly. CLAUDIEN. My dear Rosella! I fear thou hast been leading on this poor man in a fool's chase. I pity him.
ROSELLA. I fear I have, and do repent me of it.
CLAUDIEN. It was but the foible of thy gay and thoughtless [175]   nature.
ROSELLA. Ah no! I fear I have not that excuse.
CLAUDIEN. Intentional deceit!

[Page 180]
ROSELLA. Dearest Claudien! kill me not with that word and that look! It was to conceal my connection with thee, that I have of late received the gallantries of Hartman with more than usual graciousness; but it was to deceive the world rather than himself. Fool that I was!
CLAUDIEN. Yes, it was foolish.
ROSELLA. But though I might have guessed that his inordinate vanity would construe my behaviour into downright love of his fine form and mental endowments, I never imagined he would feel more pain in the disappointment than a little wounded vanity might inflict, nor am I sure that he really feels more deeply.
CLAUDIEN. I fear thou dost him wrong. I pity him from my heart; and were it possible for me to chide what is so dear, I should inflict upon thee, at this moment, words of grave rebuke.
ROSELLA. Nay, not now, dear Claudien! reserve them till thy return, for then I shall be so happy that they will sound in my ear like harmony. I cannot bear them now. (Weeping.)

[Page 181]
CLAUDIEN. [200]   Nay, nay, mistress of my soul! I meant not to distress thee so much. Those tears are a greater punishment to me than I can bear. And let me wipe them off,—kiss them off. Thou shalt never shed tears again for Claudien's sternness.
Enter Margaret. ROSELLA. What is the matter?
MARGARET. Nothing; I am only come to inform the Count that the master of the vessel is below, and wishes to know his will concerning the removal of his luggage.
CLAUDIEN. Ha! very true; I should have waited for him at home, and it slipt from my memory entirely. Keep thee from being in love, fair Margaret, it makes one's head not worth a maravedi.
MARGARET. But the heart finds what the head loses, and where is the waste?
CLAUDIEN. True, girl; and be pleasant and amusing to thy friend here, while I am absent.
                                         [Exit.
[Page 182]
ROSELLA. My dear Margaret, didst thou see Hartman when he left the house?
MARGARET. Only a glimpse of him.
ROSELLA. Did he look very miserable?
MARGARET. I do think he did, poor man; but he is so vain, he will be the better for his mortification.
ROSELLA. I thank thee, Margaret; it does me good to [225]   hear thee say so; for I know that thy thoughts and thy words are the same.
MARGARET. Come along, my dear child, and I will tell thee a new story of his consummate conceit as we go: sha'n't we take our usual turn on the terrace?
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 183]
SCENE III. A Public Garden. Enter Hartman, walking backward and forward in a perturbed manner, and presently enter Kranzberg, who stands observing him curiously before he speaks. KRANZBERG. Good morning, kinsman; nothing, I hope, has happened to disturb you: I have marked you at a distance, striding along with a quick unusual pace: pardon the solicitude of friendship, if I am anxious to know what discomposes you so much.
HARTMAN. Let it pass, let it pass! I know my place and my pretensions as well as any man; she shall neither break my heart nor discompose me long.
KRANZBERG. It is a woman, then, who is the cause of your agitation. What kind of woman can she be who is unfavourable to the suit of Baron Hartman?

[Page 184]
HARTMAN. Thou may'st well ask that question, my friend; it would, I believe, cause some surprise in many a noble citizen of Lubeck.
KRANZBERG. In many a noble lady of Lubeck we may, at least, aver, though strange unnatural things will sometimes happen, as if by witchery. But let her have her way; she will be glad enough at last to bring you back to her toils again by humble submission, if you will have spirit enough to forswear her company for a time.
HARTMAN. A time!
KRANZBERG. Ay, some weeks or so.
HARTMAN. [25]   Perhaps thou art right. I had good reason to believe my company was agreeable to her. But—but—
KRANZBERG. Out with it, Baron! you cannot question my friendship or secrecy, and perhaps I may be of use to you.
HARTMAN. This cousin of mine—

[Page 185]
KRANZBERG. What, the fair Rosella; she is the culprit!— I had almost guessed as much.
HARTMAN. But thou canst not guess the excess of her fickleness.
KRANZBERG. I will not attempt it, for you shall tell me.
HARTMAN. She denied me access to her presence this very morning, on the pretence of being unwell, and wishing to be alone; and when I made my entry by stealth through the private door of her apartment, I found her engaged in playful coquetry with Claudien.
KRANZBERG. I fear there is something more than play concerned in this coquetry.
HARTMAN. But she has not regarded him of late; her smiles were bestowed upon me.
KRANZBERG. Deceitful smiles, to cover secret passion. Believe me, kinsman, she has only made you the cover for her wiles; and I am well assured, that [50]   when he is returned from Copenhagen, where he goes to remove some obstacle to their wishes, they
[Page 186]
will, with the approbation of her brother Van Maurice, throw aside all disguise, and be married. He sails in the Mermaid to-morrow.
HARTMAN. May the waves of the sea be his winding-sheet! May the fishes of the ocean devour his lothly carcass!
KRANZBERG. It may, indeed, be lothly enough when it falls to their share, but for his living carcass, at least, you must own that is noble and goodly.
HARTMAN. I own it not: to me there is something in his air, his form, his mien, in the glance of his eye, yea, in the garb which he wears, that is intolerable.
KRANZBERG. The ladies of Lubeck think differently.
HARTMAN. Let them think as they will! it makes me mad to hear of such stupid, such perverse, such blind partiality. Senseless, fickle fools!
KRANZBERG. True, they are fickle enough; but never mind it, that will cure the evil. They will praise him for an Apollo till he marry Rosella, and abuse him for a scarecrow afterwards.

[Page 187]
HARTMAN. Marry Rosella! I will have the heart's blood from his body ere I endure this misery for one day longer.
KRANZBERG. Fy, fy, good Baron! I am very sorry I have [75]   said so much to you on this subject; but the friendly,—I may truly say, affectionate regard I feel for you, besides the admiration I have long entertained for your merits, made me unable to conceal from you longer the unworthy deceit which has been practised upon you. When I saw her smile upon you, and glance secret looks of fondness to Claudien,—
HARTMAN. Say no more of it; my very ears are ringing with the sound. I will have vengeance ere another day pass over my head.
                                         [Exit furiously. KRANZBERG (alone). Let the fool work upon this! it will embroil him at least with Van Maurice and his sister, and I shall have the management of himself and his fortune in my own hands. (In a calculating posture, after having taken a turn across the Stage, muttering to himself.) Well, two thousand good acres, corn-land and forest, though encumbered with the due maintenance of the proprietor, may be as profitable to me as a third part of the fee-simple.
[Page 188]
What idiots they are who put their throats in jeopardy of the hangman, to have the actual property of money, when without risk or trouble they may have the actual spending thereof!—O there is nothing one may not procure, when one is happy enough to have a rich [100]   fool for one's friend—one's very dear, noble, feeling, high-minded friend! To soil one's hands with crime but for a little more than one can safely wheedle from him; it is the act of a hot-headed idiot!
                                         [Exit. SCENE IV. A Library, with globes, cabinets, and other furniture, denoting the apartment of a student; a Table in front, on which burns a Lamp, the back of the Stage being entirely in shade. Enter Claudien by a concealed door at the bottom of the Stage, who walks once or twice across it in a distracted manner, and then leaning his back against the wall, continues motionless. Enter Van Maurice by the front, with a book in his hand, which he lays upon the table. VAN MAURICE (after having turned over the leaves for some time). It is very strange; the passage opened to my
[Page 189]
hand in this very book but the other day, and now it is nowhere to be found. (A heavy sigh is uttered by Claudien. ) I thought I heard something. (Looking round.) It is fancy. (Turning over the leaves again.) I will not give up the search; it was certainly here, and it will bear me out in every thing I have advanced on the subject. (A deep sigh, uttered as before.) There is somebody near me. (Looking round the room more perfectly, and discovering Claudien. ) Who art thou, lurking yonder in the shade? Come forward to the light, be thy designs hostile or friendly. Speak; say who thou art?
CLAUDIEN (advancing).
Thy friend. VAN MAURICE.
My friend, here at this hour in such a plight!
What is the matter, Claudien? what has happened? CLAUDIEN.
Something has happen'd!—I will tell thee all
When I am able. VAN MAURICE.
Thou'rt deadly pale; thy face is strangely haggard.
Sit down, sit down; thou art too weak to stand.
[Page 190]
CLAUDIEN (sinking, half supported by Van Maurice, into a chair).
The light bewilders me. VAN MAURICE.
There's fever on thee; let me feel thy hand.
Ha! there is blood upon it; thou art wounded;
[25]   Thou'rt faint and need'st assistance. (Going.) CLAUDIEN (preventing him).
Call no one here, but stay with me thyself.
'Tis not my own blood, Maurice; would it were! VAN MAURICE.
Hast thou slain any one? CLAUDIEN.
He did attack me; from his hand I wrested
The clenched dagger—plunged it in his breast. VAN MAURICE.
Then God be praised thou hast escaped, dear Claudien! CLAUDIEN.
Oh say not so! I've taken human life,
I've sent a sinful soul to its dread reck'ning. VAN MAURICE.
Be not so overcome; there is no cause.
His death is thy deliv'rance; and the laws
Of God and man will fully justify
An act of self-defence.
[Page 191]
CLAUDIEN.
But me they will not justify! Beneath me—
My knee upon his breast. (Starting from his seat with a gesture of despair.) —Oh! what availed
The poor offence of a few spiteful words,
That I should do a fell—a ruffian's deed! VAN MAURICE.
Be patient, Claudien, nor against thyself
Speak with such vehemence of condemnation.
Hadst thou resisted provocation, surely
It had been well. Thou'st done a fearful deed,
But 't was a reckless, instantaneous impulse. CLAUDIEN.
No, no! Oh, no! there was a fearful moment,
And thoughts cross'd o'er my mind before I struck him.
Would it had been an instantaneous impulse! VAN MAURICE.
[50]   Distress of mind obscures thine understanding. CLAUDIEN.
I've loved and been beloved by worthy men;
A noble, gen'rous heart dwelt in my breast,
As they believed, and so, alas, did I.
But Providence has brought it to the proof;
It was a fiend's heart; not a noble one.
Maurice, Van Maurice, when upon thy shoulder
[Page 192]

I leant this morning, list'ning to the praise
Which thy too partial friendship lavish'd on me,
That I deserved it not, full well I knew,
But little did I think a deed like this—                                          (Bursting into tears.) VAN MAURICE.
My dear, dear Claudien! I will love thee still,
Will praise thee still; thou art a noble creature. CLAUDIEN.
Call me not so! it is excruciating.
I was a happy man, he was unhappy;
I at the moment arm'd, he weaponless;
I was the victor, he upon the ground.
I might have saved his life, and meant to save it;
But keen suggestions rush'd, I know not how,
Like blasts from hell, all nature's virtue searing;
Like poison'd arrows from an ambush'd foe;
Like gleams, revealing for one fearful instant
The weltering billows of a midnight deep,—
Athwart my mind they rush'd; and what came after!
O God! thy boundless mercy may forgive,
[75]   But I for ever am a wretched man! VAN MAURICE.
But tell thy story more connectedly;
Whom hast thou slain?—Hush, hush! there's people coming.
I hear strange voices and the sound of feet.                                          (Runs to the door, and locks it.)
[Page 193]

Haste to the garden-gate,—go to thy lodgings,
Thou wert at any rate to sail to-morrow
For Copenhagen by the early tide;
Thy quitting Lubeck will not raise suspicion.
Take leave, then, of Rosella, at the hour
When she expects thee, as if nought gave pain
But leaving her. Go home, all will go well.                                          (Knocking at the door.)
Dost thou not hear? art spell-bound to the spot?
Go home immediately.                                          (Leads him hastily to the private door, and pushes him gently away.)                                          [Exit Claudien.                                          [The knocking repeated still louder without: Van Maurice returns to the opposite side and unlocks the door.] Enter Kranzberg and two Officers of Justice. KRANZBERG. How intent you have been on your studies, good Baron! to let us knock so long at your door!
VAN MAURICE. I expected no visiters at this hour.
KRANZBERG. Visiters will come at all hours when matters of moment compel them. I have that to tell you of which it concerns you much to know.—
[Page 194]
But you look as if you knew it already, for your face is as white as your neckcloth.
VAN MAURICE. I know not what you mean; but I expect to hear something very dreadful from the alarm of your manner. What concern have I in your [100]   tale? which you had better tell me quickly in as few words as may be. What has happened?
KRANZBERG. Your cousin, Baron Hartman, is murdered; the body has been found in a field, under the northern rampart.
VAN MAURICE. Are you sure he is dead? The dagger, perhaps, has not gone so deep as you imagine; and he may but have fainted from loss of blood.
FIRST OFFICER (stepping eagerly up to Van Maurice ). And how do you know, Sir, that it is a dagger which has given the wound?
VAN MAURICE (in confusion). I guess—I suppose—it is the common weapon of an assassin.
SECOND OFFICER (aside to Kranzberg ). Did you mark that? I have my suspicions.

[Page 195]
KRANZBERG (after a pause, during which they all look on Van Maurice and on one another significantly). But you give us no orders, Van Maurice? You are his nearest kinsman: it belongs to you to act on this unhappy occasion.
                                         [Whilst they are speaking, First Officer goes round the room, looking into every corner, and at last stoops and lifts something from the floor, at the bottom of the Stage.] VAN MAURICE. Yes, true; something should be done. Let the body be removed to his house, and try if it can possibly be recovered.
KRANZBERG. That has been done already, and it is as dead as the corpse of your grandfather. Are these all the orders you have to give? Sha'n't we send an armed party through the country to track out the murderer?
FIRST OFFICER (advancing). We need not track him far. (Holding up the dagger.) [125]   Here is his mark: and, Baron Van Maurice, I arrest thee in the name of the state. (Laying hold of him.)
VAN MAURICE (repelling him). Lay no hands on me, or ye may dearly answer for such an outrage. I am most innocent of the
[Page 196]
crime with which you would charge me; though I may well look disturbed on hearing such terrible intelligence.
KRANZBERG. Ay, so thou may'st; but there is more than looks to condemn thee. (Showing him the dagger, upon which he recoils some paces back, and seems confounded.) Does this appal thee? We arrest thee in the name of the state, and this shall be our witness that we have not acted rashly.
                                         [They all endeavour to seize him, while he struggles with them; and then enter several Servants.] FIRST SERVANT. Lay hands on our master! Ye shall take our lives, hell-hounds, ere ye wrong one hair of his head.
FIRST OFFICER. We arrest him in the name of the state, and he is our lawful prisoner.
FIRST SERVANT (showing a pistol). And I will blow your brains out in my own name, if ye do not let him go i' the instant.
                                         More armed Servants rushing in, surround Kranzberg and the Officers, and rescue Van Maurice. ]
[Page 197]
VAN MAURICE (recovering his composure). Ye see I am freed from your grasp, and ye are now prisoners in this house during my pleasure.
All the Servants, speaking at once. Yes, noble Baron; give them to our charge, and we will keep them securely, I warrant you.
VAN MAURICE (to the Servants). I thank you, my friends; but I have somewhat [150]   more to say to these gentlemen. Ye see that I might detain you here, as long as my own convenience or safety, granting I were guilty, might require it; but I release you freely, upon this condition, that I shall remain at liberty, unmolested, till to-morrow mid-day; after that hour, I bind myself, as a man of honour, to be found here in my own house, ready without resistance to obey the laws of my country.
FIRST OFFICER. Spoken like a man of honour, and we will trust you.
VAN MAURICE (to Kranzberg ). And you promise this? (To Second Officer.) And you.
KRANZBERG and SECOND OFFICER (both at once). We do.
VAN MAURICE (to Servants). Let these gentlemen retire freely when it is
[Page 198]
their pleasure. (To Kranzberg. ) Kinsman, good night.
                                         [Exit. [ Kranzberg and Officers remain on the front, whilst the Servants retire to the bottom of the Stage.] FIRST OFFICER (to Kranzberg ). Had we not better go hence and return by and by with a guard to hover, concealed round the house, and watch his motions? He may make his escape else, for all his fair promises.
KRANZBERG. Let him do so; if he fly the country he is outlawed, and that will serve the purpose as effectually.
FIRST OFFICER. Purpose! is there any other purpose but the [175]   vindication of the law, which says, “He who sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed.”
                                         [ Kranzberg turns away in confusion, and pretends to speak to the Servants at the bottom of the Stage.] SECOND OFFICER. What! man, dost thou not understand him?
FIRST OFFICER. No, faith! and thy wit is sharper than I reckon for if thou dost.

[Page 199]
SECOND OFFICER. Yet the mystery is not very deep neither. The Baron here is heir to Baron Hartman, and Kranzberg again is next heir after him, the lands being strictly so destined; and an outlaw, thou knowest, is a dead man as to all inheritance.
FIRST OFFICER. Why, there's some sense in that. And by my faith! if Van Maurice has murdered Hartman to transfer his large estate to Kranzberg, he has sold himself to the devil for a ducat.
SECOND OFFICER. Yes; hell will have a good bargain of it every way, for the revenues of the land will be as much spent for its interest in the possession of Kranzberg, as if given in fee simple to Beelzebub.
FIRST OFFICER. Nay, nay; he lives in good repute,—thou art uncharitable.
KRANZBERG (advancing to the front). Come, friends; let us return to our homes; to-morrow, at mid-day, we meet here again.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 200]
SCENE V. The Apartment of Rosella; she enters, followed by an old Seaman, speaking as she enters. ROSELLA. And the wind is fair, thou sayest, but the sky foretelling change. Thou art an old mariner, good Jacome, and hast skill in sky and weather; tell me, then, faithfully, does it forbode a storm?
JACOME. No, madam; not to say a storm; nothing to make you or any of the friends of Count Claudien uneasy: a stiff gale or so; and that, with a tight new vessel to trust to, is but a passing rouse for sailors or passengers either. It only makes a stir on board and the blood circulate more quickly. No, no, no! nothing to make one uneasy.
ROSELLA. God grant it may be so!
JACOME. Fear not, madam, fear not! You know I never speak but as I think; and I would not disgrace my former calling now by lying like a landsman.

[Page 201]
ROSELLA. I hear them coming; do what I desired thee, quickly.
                                         [Exit Jacome.
Thank heaven! the voyage is but short; the time
Of his return fix'd as the calendar,
If that the fickle winds will give permission. Enter Claudien and Van Maurice.
True to the hour of taking leave, my Claudien:
Ah! be as punctual to the promised time
Of thy return. And wilt thou not? CLAUDIEN.
                                         At least,
[25]   The fault shall not be mine, if I am not. ROSELLA.
How gravely and how solemnly thou sayest so!
Has aught befallen to make thee on this point
Less sure than thou wert yesterday?—Dear brother,
You spoke so lightly of our parting then,
But now your cheer is wonderfully changed. VAN MAURICE.
Something indeed has happen'd, dear Rosella,
That may defer thy Claudien's return
For a short month or so.
[Page 202]
ROSELLA (after looking at them inquiringly).
                                         No, no, Van Maurice,
Upon your faces I do plainly read
A more distressing tale. Deceive me not:
Tell me the worst at once; I'm his betroth'd,
And have a right to know it. Have I not?
Have I not, gentle Claudien? CLAUDIEN.
Thou hast a right to every thing, my love,
That a devoted heart can give. My life,
All that deserves the name of life, I have
But in thy presence; to be absent from thee
Longer than strict necessity compels
Would be a wanton act of self-destruction.
Trust, then, that he who is so strongly bound
Will soon return. The carrier-bird, released,
Points to one cherish'd spot her arrowy flight;
Not air's bright insects, nor earth's alpine peaks,
[50]   With purple berries clothed, her wonted lures,
From its true line can warp it e'en so much
As the vibration of a stricken cord. ROSELLA.
This is no answer: art thou not my own,—
Almost my husband, and here stands a brother,
And yet you deal with me in mysteries.
Fie! is this well? Have I deserved this wrong? VAN MAURICE.
Be satisfied, Rosella; urge us not.
[Page 203]

It is not want of confidence in thee
Which makes us so reserved; urge no further. ROSELLA.
Nay, but I will; for ye conceal from me
Some recent and disastrous event
To spare me pain. But ye mistake your aim.
Incertainty is aggravated pain.
Is he a ruin'd man? then I am ready
With heart and hand to sooth his poverty.
Is he proscribed by law? then I am ready
My country to abandon for his sake.
Say any thing, and I will bear it firmly
And meekly as I may. CLAUDIEN.
My dearest love, I thought to have parted from thee
With brighter omens of a glad return:
But now thou weep'st because the very day
Of my return is doubtful. If I stay
Two weeks or three weeks longer than we reckoned,
[75]   Shall I not still be welcome? ROSELLA.
O, mock me not with weeks! thou knowest well
No time can make thee otherwise than welcome;
To me most dearly welcome.
Keep thy mysterious secret, if thou must;
But make amends by swearing on this hand
[Page 204]

Not to extend thine absence for a day
Beyond the added time which thou hast mentioned. CLAUDIEN.
Upon this hand, so lovely and so dear,
Not to be absent for a day—an hour
Longer than sad necessity compels me.
But thou meanwhile wilt keep me in thy thoughts.
Write to me often; wilt thou not, Rosella?
And be to me, in whate'er clime or country
A wayward fate may doom me to reside,
The very gleam and warmth of my existence. ROSELLA.
A wayward fate may doom thee to reside!
What words are these? Thou never wilt return!                                          (Wringing her hands in anguish.) VAN MAURICE (aside to Claudien ).
Begone, begone! thy weakness will betray us.
Sister; thou givest way to apprehension,
Like a poor perverse wife who has been spoil'd
With long indulgence. 'T is a paltry proof
Of thy affection in an hour like this,
To add to his distress. Fie! be more generous! ROSELLA.
And art thou angry with me, gentle Maurice?
[100]   Thou art not wont to chide. O, woe is me!
[Page 205]

There must be something wrong—far wrong, indeed,
When he is sorrowful and thou unkind. VAN MAURICE.
Pardon me, sister, something has distressed me;
I meant not to have told thee till to-morrow.
Our cousin Hartman died last night. ROSELLA.
                                         So suddenly!
Awfully sudden! I am sorry for it;
Yes; very, very sorry. Ah, poor Hartman!
I have, with too much levity, I fear,
Made his last days pass most uneasily.
He was vindictive, vain, and irritable:
But when the storm of passion passed away,
Who was more ready to repair a wrong
With generous amends? Alas! poor Hartman!
And thou too, gentle Claudien, weep'st for him,
Although he loved thee not. Well may'st thou weep;
For thou wert also one of his tormentors:
Ay, we did both of us too hardly press
Upon his natural infirmity. CLAUDIEN.
Detested wretch! I've been a fiend, a— VAN MAURICE (laying hold of him, and pressing his mouth).
                                         Claudien,
[Page 206]

Art thou a madman?—Come, the wind is fair,
The vessel is already weighing anchor.
Bid to your mistress, then, a short adieu,
[125]   As cheerly as you may. (They embrace and separate.)
Yes; bravely done, Rosella!—bravely done!
Thou art the firmest now. ROSELLA (stepping after Claudien ).
Take this, and this, and wear them for my sake. Enter Margaret. MARGARET. There is a ship-boy below with notice that the Mermaid is just leaving port.
VAN MAURICE (to Claudien ).
Come then, my friend; we may no longer tarry. ROSELLA.
Go, Claudien: I will hie me to the roof
Of my pavilion; there I'll watch thy ship,
Till, like a sea-bird, on the distant waves
It fades away to nothing. Two hours still
It will be visible. Cast up thy mantle;
Make me, I pray, some signal from the deck.
Farewell, heaven prosper thee! farewell, farewell!                                          [Exeunt Claudien and Van Maurice, but the latter returns hastily, and whispers to Margaret. ]
[Page 207]
ROSELLA. What did he whisper to thee, Margaret? I am frightened at every thing.
MARGARET. Nothing of importance: it was only to tell me that some necessary business might detain him from home the whole day; and, if so, you must not be uneasy.
ROSELLA. Uneasy! I may be as I will now: it matters not how I am till Claudien return again.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 208]
ACT II. SCENE I. —The Deck of a Ship, with a stormy Sea seen dimly beyond it. Sailors and Passengers are discovered, some on their knees, some clinging to the shrouds, some staggering about with wild gestures of despair, whilst some are endeavouring to work the ship, and disputing about what should be done; and a great confusion of voices is heard through the noise of the storm. The whole light should proceed from one part of the deck; viz. the binnacle, by which means want of expression of countenance in the under-actors will not be discovered, as none need come within the gleam of its light but those who can give expression. Claudien is discovered busy in assisting those who are endeavouring to save the vessel, near the bottom of the Stage. CAPTAIN (on the front). I say it must be done; she cannot else be saved. Boatswain, thy refractory spirit is more dangerous than the tempest. (A great confusion of sounds and voices.) All hands to work i' the instant! Cut down the mast; lighten her of every thing, bales, casks, and chests,—cast all to the deep!

[Page 209]
BOATSWAIN. By our Lady, it were downright cowardice to spoil ourselves of every thing for such a risk as this!
CAPTAIN. Thou know'st nothing of the matter.
BOATSWAIN. I have been in worse peril before, when both mast and freightage have been saved.
CAPTAIN. Be silent, madman! I am to judge of the peril, not thou. We are driving on the rocks of that very coast from which we departed: yonder gleams the lighthouse on the cliff.
MANY VOICES (at once). Lord have mercy on us! heaven have mercy on us!
CAPTAIN. Silence, and hear my commands. All hands to work! life and death hang on your present exertions.
                                         [Great noise and confusion, and they begin to cut down the mast and cast things overboard.] FIRST SAILOR (with a loud voice). It is all in vain! lighten her as you will, it can avail nothing as long as there is a murderer [25]   on board.

[Page 210]
CAPTAIN (catching hold of him). What mean'st thou? On which of my passengers or crew dost thou fix such a horrible charge?
FIRST SAILOR (pointing to Claudien ). To that man yonder, your noble Danish passenger. If the devil have him not presently under the waves, neither ship nor one soul of all her living freight will be afloat one hour longer.
CAPTAIN. Thou speak'st in distraction.
FIRST SAILOR. I know that sound in the blast: no natural tempest ever bellows so.
MANY VOICES (as before). Heaven have mercy upon us! it is a fearful sound!
FIRST SAILOR. There be fiends on the clouds and on the waves; they are roaring for their prey, and in God's name cast it to them instantly.
CAPTAIN. Thou art beside thyself! how knowest thou he is a murderer?
FIRST SAILOR. I heard him utter exclamations when he thought there was no one near him. Question
[Page 211]
him thyself; if he will swear himself innocent of blood, send me to the bottom in his stead.
CAPTAIN (beckoning Claudien to the front). Sir passenger, come hither. This man (pointing to First Sailor ) has heard thee utter such words as compels him to accuse thee of murder. [50]   We may all be summoned few moments hence into the presence of our Great Judge, who cannot be deceived: if thou art guilty, cry to God for mercy and confess it; a ship in peril may not be laden with such an unblessed freight. Art thou innocent of blood?
CLAUDIEN. I am innocent of deliberate murder, but not of blood.
FIRST SAILOR. He confesses.
MANY VOICES. He confesses! he confesses! away with him!
OTHER VOICES. Cast him overboard, or we shall be all dead men presently.
CLAUDIEN. Hear me first, before ye be so rash.
VOICES (again). No, no, no! we cannot sacrifice our own lives for thine: cast him overboard.

[Page 212]
FIRST SAILOR. Bind him hand and foot, and cast him to the fiends that are roaring for him.
                                         [They surround Claudien to bind him, when he draws his sword.] CLAUDIEN. I will cut down the first man who dares to lay hands on me. Bind a fellow-creature and cast him to the waves! ye are worse than the fiends ye are afraid of: and if they be roaring for me, as ye apprehend, doubt not but they will have me, whether I am bound or free.
CAPTAIN. He says well: cast him overboard unbound, that he may save himself if possible.
                                         [They again close round him to seize him, and he still keeps them off with his sword.] CLAUDIEN. [75]   Lay hands upon me at your peril! You need not be so fierce; for I will myself commit this body to the sea, that will, perhaps, be more merciful than you.
                                         [He retires to the farther side of the deck, with his face to the crew and his back to the sea; then holding up his hand, as if uttering a short prayer, turns quickly round, and jumps overboard, the whole crew raising a wild cry, and remaining for a few moments after it in deep silence; the sound of the storm only heard.]
[Page 213]
CAPTAIN. He is a brave man, let him be what he may. God have mercy on us, and send us safe on our voyage! We have paid for it a fearful price! (Calling to some who are looking over the side of the vessel.) Can you see aught? Does he sink or swim?
BOATSWAIN. I saw his dark head once above the waves.
SECOND SAILOR. I saw it too.
THIRD SAILOR. So did I. God help him, and us too!
SECOND SAILOR. Look, look, yonder, I see it again! but a huge billow breaks over it: we shall see it no more.
THIRD SAILOR. He is too deep now under water, to rise a living man.
                                         [The sound of the storm as before, very loud.] CAPTAIN. The tempest is as violent as ever! we must lighten the ship after all.
                                         [A great clamour and commotion among the crew, and the scene closes.]
[Page 214]
SCENE II. A Lawyer's Study, lumbered with tables, books, and papers, &c. Enter Borion, with a scroll in his hand, which he examines attentively. He then pauses, and considers before he speaks to himself. BORION. Proofs like these should condemn any man; why should I recoil from the task? (Paces up and down, and then stopping short.) Would this business were put into other hands! My client is candid and specious, as far as speech is concerned, but that sinister eye, the play of those muscles by the mouth, the widening of the nostrils at every virtuous sentiment he utters:— physiognomy is the whimsy of simpletons, if there be any truth or sincerity in that man. But here he comes.
Enter Kranzberg. KRANZBERG. Well, learned Sir, having had full time for consideration, what think you of it now? (A pause.) You see, I found my prosecution on no slight or fanciful proofs. Thus it stands: next
[Page 215]
heir to the deceased; his confusion when we told him of the murder; that unwary expression which fell from him, showing that he knew with what weapon the wound was inflicted; and, above all, the dagger found in his apartment,— every thing combines to fix the foul deed upon him. There is no judge in the land who will hesitate to give sentence in my favour.
BORION. In your favour, Sir! is it favour to you that [25]   your near relation should be publicly executed as a murderer? I thought you had prosecuted unwillingly, as next nearest of kin to the deceased, and therefore compelled to it.
KRANZBERG. True—very true, learned Borion; in my favour as a prosecutor, who, from duty, would make good his accusation. But as a man and a kinsman, with the affections of both, which heaven knows how deeply I feel! most keenly and severely against me. You perceive the distinction here?
BORION. It had escaped me.
KRANZBERG. I am drawn two different ways by two powerful ties; but my duty to the public must be preferred.
[Page 216]
O, dear Sir! you little know the painful conflict in this bosom.
BORION. I can guess at it, Sir. But does Van Maurice, since his imprisonment, still continue to assert his innocence?
KRANZBERG. Of course he does. Is any man's assertion or oath regarded in a matter of this nature?
BORION. Yes, Sir; there are some men, whose simple word will go far in a matter of any nature, and Van Maurice is one of those.
KRANZBERG. Ah, my good Sir; there is a prepossession in [50]   your mind, but let my wretched kinsman have the benefit of it; I wish not to remove it. Indeed I knew of this prepossession beforehand; and that I applied to you for the conduct of this prosecution, notwithstanding, shows how little I am disposed to deal hardly with the prisoner.— But here come the men whom you may question.
Enter a Servant, showing in the two Officers of Justice. BORION (waving his hand). Let them pass into the further apartment.
                                         [Exeunt Officers.
[Page 217]
KRANZBERG. You are cautious, I see, and would question them apart from me. But you are right; I am nowise offended; on the contrary, even your distrust of myself gives me confidence in your integrity. [Exit Borion, following the Officers, while Kranzberg looks angrily after him.] The devil take his incredulous nature! who would demur on such flagrant proof as this? If it were not that the trial comes on to-morrow, and I dare not delay it, lest he should, after all, be innocent, I would put it into other hands that would undertake it more heartily. (After consideration.) No, no! I must press him to retain it. Were it known that he had given it up, that would create a strong prejudice against me. I must press him to retain it.
                                         [Exit. SCENE III. A Prison: Van Maurice is discovered at the bottom of the Stage in a thoughtful disconsolate posture; he then comes forward and remains a short time, muttering to himself, before he speaks aloud. VAN MAURICE.
And infamy and death must be my portion
For my adherence to the manly ties
[Page 218]

Of honour and of friendship!—No alternative!
Betray his confidence to save my life!
Do what is base to save me from disgrace!
Surely, some fiend of darkness must be dealing
With my necessity, when thoughts like these
Contaminate my mind.
He came to me in misery; in secret
His soul pour'd out its bitterness before me.
Away, away! ye base and mean suggestions!
God will deliver me.—Or should his will
Appoint my life to be the sacrifice,
The mem'ry of the just shall be at length
Redeemed from all dishonour. [Noise at the door. Enter Gaoler.]
Who's there? let no one enter but my sister
Or the good priest; have I not told thee so? Enter Ardusoffe. ARDUSOFFE. And may not your faithful counsellor also be admitted?
VAN MAURICE. Ay, true; I forgot thee, good Ardusoffe.— Well, what hast thou done for me? Hast thou discovered any thing that may tend to my exculpation? —Alas! thou shakest thy head: thou hast not been successful.
ARDUSOFFE. [25]   Not, I fear, in any material degree. Your
[Page 219]
servants unanimously declare their belief that you did not quit your apartments for the whole of that evening on which the fatal deed was committed: but as you were entirely shut up from the hour of twilight to almost midnight, the grounds of their belief are not satisfactory; your apartments, unhappily, having a private door leading to the garden, and from thence into the street.
VAN MAURICE. True; their belief only, under such circumstances, is but weak evidence.
ARDUSOFFE. It was your custom, they say, to ring your bell for some slight refreshment between nine and ten o'clock, but on that night, most unfortunately, you omitted it.
VAN MAURICE. My studies occupied me so entirely, that I forgot it.
ARDUSOFFE. I do most perfectly believe you: but who, sitting in judgment on attested facts, and compelled to pronounce sentence accordingly, will regard such asseveration? In short, my dear client, I am obliged to forewarn you, that if you still persist in refusing to account for the dagger being found in your chamber, and your previous
[Page 220]
[50]   knowledge that the deceased was slain by a wound from such a weapon, I see not how your judges can acquit you.
VAN MAURICE. Be it so! I am innocent: Heaven will protect me.
ARDUSOFFE. God grant you deliverance! But the ways of Divine Providence are mysterious as to this world. In the next, most assuredly, the innocent are always delivered.
VAN MAURICE. Have you, then, in the course of your legal experience, known instances of the innocent suffering death for imputed crimes?
ARDUSOFFE. I have; even when tried by an impartial judge, and the fair laws of their country.
VAN MAURICE. But their memory was vindicated afterwards, else you had never been acquainted with such dismal perversion of circumstances.
ARDUSOFFE. After many years,—nearly the lapse of half a century, it was discovered.

[Page 221]
VAN MAURICE (shuddering). Awful dispensation? Almost all his contemporaries —those whom he had loved and regarded, would go down to their graves, believing him guilty and depraved.
                                         (Turns away from him much distressed.) ARDUSOFFE. Let me conjure you, then, to do justice to yourself! It is a fearful thing to be cut off in [75]   the prime of your days,—to die by the hands of an executioner,—to finish your course in disgrace.
VAN MAURICE. It is a fearful thing!—You tempt my mortal weakness almost beyond resistance.
ARDUSOFFE. Let nature have its way! O, consider of it! Run not on self-destruction.
VAN MAURICE (supporting himself on the shoulder of Ardusoffe ). Forbear a few moments, good Ardusoffe; I am considering of it.
ARDUSOFFE (after a pause). The dew-drops stand upon thy forehead, and
[Page 222]
thy whole frame is moved: decide as nature bids thee, and let this conflict cease.                                          [A pause, in which Van Maurice, sinking from the shoulder of Ardusoffe, covers his face with both his hands.] O have mercy on thyself, and let this conflict cease!
VAN MAURICE (raising himself suddenly, with vehemence of gesture and voice).
It hath ceased, Ardusoffe, I'm now a man:
I will die honour'd in my inward mind,
And in the sight of heaven. Betide what will,
I'll not betray my trust! ARDUSOFFE.
Alas, alas! may Heaven have pity on thee,
Since thou repell'st all pity for thyself! Enter Rosella. ROSELLA.
I left thee, dearest Maurice, cheer'd and tranquil,
Like one possessing hope; what is the matter? ARDUSOFFE. Dear lady, circumstances bear hard against your brother; and, from some point of honour which I am not permitted to know, he refrains from exculpating himself. Join your entreaties
[Page 223]
[100]   with mine; you who are so deeply concerned in his safety and justification. Death and disgrace must not be incurred from romantic adherence to honour.
VAN MAURICE. If I could gain a respite for some weeks!
ARDUSOFFE. You may apply for it, and I will urge your suit; but it will be refused. Kranzberg, for his own sordid interest, pushes on the trial; and he is in high credit and favour with the judges.
ROSELLA.
O for my sake, if not thine own, my brother,
For my sake be entreated! In thy ruin
I shall be ruin'd, agonised, and crush'd;
Think not I could survive it! VAN MAURICE.
Leave me, Oh leave me; I am only fit
With mine own thoughts to commune. Your entreaties
Do but the more distract me.                                          (Aside to Ardusoffe. )
Return to me again, but leave me now.                                          [Exit Ardusoffe. ROSELLA.
Alas! and wilt thou not relent, dear Maurice?                                          [A pause.]
[Page 224]

Why dost thou shake thy head, and look on me
So ruefully? there is a meaning in it. VAN MAURICE.
God save thee, my poor sister! ROSELLA.
Yes, God will save me, saving thee my brother,
Not else; for if thou die a felon's death,
I never can survive it.—For my sake
And for the sake of him, thine absent friend,
[125]   Our gentle Claudien: would that he were here
To join with mine his earnest, strong entreaties! VAN MAURICE (putting his hand upon her lips in an alarmed manner, and speaking low).
Hush! utter not his name; 'tis good for thee
That he is absent. ROSELLA.
Why that emotion at his name? Speak, speak!
Is he concern'd in this? VAN MAURICE.
Inquire no further, seek no further misery:
Thou hast enough already. ROSELLA.
A dreadful light breaks in upon me now;
Is Claudien concern'd? (looks earnestly in his face.) He is, he is!                                          (Faints in the arms of her brother.)
[Page 225]
VAN MAURICE.
It is a death-blow to her stricken heart.
How fix'd and pale that lovely countenance,
More like my mother's than I ever saw it.
Like her who loved us both and rear'd us tenderly,
Who daily shed her widow's blessing o'er us,
And little thought for what calamities
We both might be reserved.
But she revives. How art thou, sweet Rosella? ROSELLA.
I've been asleep, and thought some fearful thing
Was girding me.—O no! it was not sleep:
I know it now distinctly. VAN MAURICE.
                                         Thou tremblest violently. ROSELLA.
I tremble, but thou need'st not be afraid;
I shall not faint again. VAN MAURICE.
                                         Fear not for Claudien. ROSELLA.
[150]   My own dear brother; gen'rous and devoted;
Is any thing more precious than thyself?
No, right is right; thou shalt not die for Claudien.
Thank God he's absent! let him so remain:
[Page 226]

I'll to the judges; I'll declare the truth;
I'll vindicate thy innocence, my Maurice. VAN MAURICE (embracing her).
I thank thee, kind Rosella; but thy plea
Were altogether fruitless.—
Who would give credit to thy testimony?
For they will deem, to save a brother's life,
Thou dost accuse an absent man. Beside,
Who will corroborate what thou aver'st?
And what could'st thou aver? I've told thee nothing,
And, so God strengthen me! I never will. ROSELLA.
I'll to the judges; cast me at their feet,
And beg respite till I can write to Claudien. VAN MAURICE.
And would'st thou have him to return to Lubeck
That he may put himself into my place? ROSELLA (distractedly).
I know not what I would or what I wish;
But thou, my noble Maurice, shalt not die. VAN MAURICE. Here comes the good confessor: leave me, sister.
Enter the Confessor, shown in by the Turnkey. You're welcome, reverend Father. (To the Turnkey.) Does any attendant on this lady wait without?

[Page 227]
TURNKEY. Yes, Baron; a lady waits for her, who accompanied [175]   her to the gate.
VAN MAURICE. Desire her to enter; I would speak with her. [Exit Turnkey.] Good Father, comfort this afflicted daughter.
                                         (Speaking aside to Rosella, as he leads her to the Friar.)
Let nothing pass your lips that hath a reference
To what we spoke of: take good heed; be secret. Sooth her, good Father; thou hast words of consolation for every earthly affliction.
Enter Margaret. I thank thee, friendly Margaret, for thy kind attendance on my poor distressed sister. Come near to me. (Draws her to the front of the Stage, whilst the Confessor speaks in dumb show to Rosella behind.) Rosella is not well; there is fever upon her spirits, and her mind wanders wildly. Be not alarmed at this, but give her an opiate,—a very powerful opiate: she has need of rest, and nature has no sleep for one so distracted with anxiety.
MARGARET. I will do so: she has been forwatched and
[Page 228]
greatly distressed. And I pray heaven, dear Baron, that you may also have rest!
VAN MAURICE. I thank thee, Margaret. But do not tarry here! lead her away immediately. I do not wish to see her till the trial is over. (Returning to Rosella. ) Farewell, dear sister! I must now give my thoughts to things which regard [200]   not this world. [Exeunt Rosella and Margaret. ] We will, if you please, good Father, retire to the inner cell.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE IV. The House of Kranzberg. Enter Kranzberg, followed by Corman, bearing a salver with wine, &c. which he sets upon a table. KRANZBERG (speaking as they enter). Thou art right, Corman; a cup of this old Rhenish will do me good. I have been the whole day in a state of presentation; the eyes of many have been upon me; my cumbersome suit of decorum sits heavily upon me now; I must drop it for awhile and unbrace myself.

[Page 229]
CORMAN (pouring out wine and presenting it). Here, Sir; this will refresh you in the mean time, and your repast will be ready presently.
KRANZBERG (after drinking). Ha, ha, ha! what a mountebank world we live in, full of inconsistencies: every body eagerly running after some wild delusion or other! To think, now, that a sober philosopher like Van Maurice should start up from his books, his globes, and compass, to put a foolish kinsman out of the world, and all for the enriching of Simon Kranzberg, whom he likes as much as thou dost a bit of musty stock-fish. By my faith, it is some waggish devil that hath tempted him to this imbecility of wickedness.
CORMAN. Yes, master; and the devil will take care of your interest for his own advantage.
KRANZBERG. But I'll cheat him, too, in the long run.
CORMAN. It must be some clever device, indeed, that cheats him.
KRANZBERG. [25]   I'll give donations to the church; or I'll endow a chapel, and appoint a priest to pray my soul out of purgatory.

[Page 230]
CORMAN. Ah, Sir! that will be a hard work for a simple priest of your appointment; it would be work enough for an archbishop. But it will help at least to put you into credit with the world.
KRANZBERG. Put me into cred it with the world! Am I not in very good credit with the world?—Why dost thou shake thy head so? Am I not? I have broken no laws: I have disregarded no rules of decency. I have preserved a show of kindness to all men; ay, and have felt real kindness for some. What does the world know against me, that thou shouldst look so significantly?
CORMAN. I don't say that they know any thing against you; but there is something in human nature called suspicion, that will sometimes contravene most provokingly all the good seeming that a painstaking man can put on.
KRANZBERG. And what do they suspect? What cause have I given for suspicion?
CORMAN. Why, my dear Sir, that story of the heiress stands somewhat between you and their good opinion.

[Page 231]
KRANZBERG. [50]   They stumble at a small impediment, methinks. Was it my fault that her needy uncle ran off with her fortune? Would they have had me marry a beggar, because I had inadvertently made suit to her?
CORMAN. Nay, heaven forbid! that were too romantic for a sane burgher of Lubeck; but they are not yet become liberal enough to tolerate inadvertent oaths.
KRANZBERG. Out on thee! Hadst thou managed that business for me with three grains of common sense, the transaction would never have been known.
CORMAN. Ah, my dear master! but you forget that my three grains of common sense were coupled with your three grains of cunning, and they did not prove prosperous yoke-fellows.
KRANZBERG. Go to! it is a fair character that has but one blot upon it.
CORMAN. True, if there were but one.
KRANZBERG. Lay they any thing else to my charge?

[Page 232]
CORMAN. That matter of the poor widow's leasehold, which you deprived her of so cleverly, was not exactly to their mind.
KRANZBERG. Devil take them! and they boggle at that too! Had I not law on my side?
CORMAN. [75]   I fear you had only decision.
KRANZBERG. No, no! I had law. But those noodles are always canting about equity and natural justice; and one is obliged to do so too, till it is enough to make one sick.
CORMAN. To be sure this last effect is rather sickening.
KRANZBERG. And thy untimely bantering is little better. Say what thou wilt, I know that I stand in as good credit with the world as any man in our imperial city. But who comes here? Pshaw! It is Ardusoffe; I must on with my buckrams again.
Enter Ardusoffe. ARDUSOFFE. Sir, I am come from the prison of your unhappy
[Page 233]
kinsman, on a most earnest suit, which your known goodness and humanity will not, I am confident, suffer you to refuse.
KRANZBERG. Speak it plainly and freely, Sir. He is, indeed, unhappy, and I am little less so, in being forced to prosecute a near relation for such an atrocious deed. You don't know how much I feel on this unfortunate occasion.
ARDUSOFFE. Better, perhaps, than you are aware of. Your inward dispositions are too well depicted on your countenance to leave any one in doubt of your real worth. My present suit will give you an [100]   opportunity of proving your professions. I come most earnestly to request that you will use your interest with the judges to have this trial put off for a few weeks.
KRANZBERG. Ah, good Ardusoffe! would that my bounden duty to society did not pull me the contrary way; and I would, on my bended knees, pray that it might be put off, not only for a few weeks, but a few months, a few years; ay, for ever.
ARDUSOFFE. Nay, nay! you exceed in tender sympathy: a few weeks is all that we desire, and I will this
[Page 234]
moment go with you to the judges to beseech them to grant us this indulgence.
KRANZBERG. No, that won't do; I must go to the judges alone. On such occasions a third party creates embarrassment. You understand me?
ARDUSOFFE. I think I do, Sir; and will trust to your exertions accordingly.
KRANZBERG. My dear Sir, you do not understand me. I will leave no entreaty untried to gain what you desire for your client. But what is your object in this delay? is there any witness that could exculpate your client, who might be summoned in that time?
ARDUSOFFE. Yes; this is our reason for soliciting delay.
KRANZBERG. [125]   And who is this witness? and from what place do you call him?
ARDUSOFFE (drawing back from him). That is a matter, good Sir, less material for you to know than for us to conceal.
KRANZBERG. Very true; I should have remembered this: I respect you for your caution, though it is not
[Page 235]
my way of proceeding. I am so free and open myself, that I forget the prudent habits of concealment, which may be commendable in others. And now I will honestly tell you that I am certain my suit to the judges for delay will be of no avail.
ARDUSOFFE. That you are certain, may be true; for you can make it so.
KRANZBERG. You mistake me again. But I am not angry at this. I can forgive the jealousy which arises from the excess of laudable zeal; and to prove this I will frankly serve your client in the only way in my power. I will gain over the guard, who are appointed for this evening's watch, and favour his escape from prison. Do you pause at this when there is such damning evidence against him?
ARDUSOFFE (drily). I shall report to him what you say.
KRANZBERG. At the hour of twilight he will find his prison [150]   doors unbarred, and let him come forth fearlessly.
ARDUSOFFE. I will go forthwith and report to him what you say.
                                         [Exit.
[Page 236]
KRANZBERG. Have I cozened that suspicious fellow at last? [Re-enter Corman, who had retired upon Ardusoffe's coming in.] I have cozened that suspicious fellow at last. If Van Maurice be caught making his escape, the trial will proceed immediately. The bright thought came into my head of a sudden; I wonder I did not think of it before.
CORMAN. But if he were really to escape and be outlawed, would not that serve your turn sufficiently.
KRANZBERG. Ay, if the present senior judge were to retain his office; but he will resign it in a month to one who is most partially attached to the family of Van Maurice. No, no! we should have him returning from his outlawry again, and submitting to a mock trial, which would declare him innocent, and restore him to his rights. No, no! the trial must proceed immediately; and it will do so if he be caught in an attempt to escape.
CORMAN. Think you he will fall into the snare?
KRANZBERG. I think he will; I am sure he will: and even if he should refuse, we can raise a great clamour
[Page 237]
and confusion about the prison walls as if he had [175]   attempted it, which may turn to our account nearly as well as the reality. I say our, for thou knowest well that when I take possession of the inheritance, a good portion of it will fall to thy share. Let me have my meal first, and I'll give thee thy directions about this matter afterwards.
CORMAN. It is ready, Sir.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE V. Before the walls of a Prison: a Sentinel is discovered walking to and fro by an arched Gateway, and several Men muffled in cloaks, peeping occasionally from behind an outer buttress near the front. A small Door at the further end of the arch opens slowly, and Ardusoffe enters by it, through the gateway, his face hid by his cloak. SENTINEL. Ho! you pass not so slily as you think: who are you? let me see your face?
ARDUSOFFE (in a feigned voice). A friend to the noble prisoner, and the same who passed into that door half an hour ago.

[Page 238]
SENTINEL. Thou dost not speak with the same voice, I'm certain.
ARDUSOFFE. Nay, my good friend; thine ears are deceived by thine own suspicion. (In a whisper.) Behold my face; dost thou not remember it?
                                         [Going close to the Sentinel and turning his back to the front of the Stage, he uncovers his face for a moment, on which the other, with a nod, suffers him to pass. He then proceeds on his way, and is about to go off, when Corman and his companions burst upon him from behind the buttress.] CORMAN. We seize thee in the name of the law.
ARDUSOFFE (still concealing his face). Go to! you mistake me for another; suffer me to pass. Ye have no right to detain me.
CORMAN. Come under the lamp here, and let us see your face.
                                         [They drag him towards the light, he making great resistance, when Kranzberg enters suddenly and lays hold of him.]
[Page 239]
KRANZBERG. Resistance is in vain, Van Maurice: we seize thee in the act of making escape from prison; and in the name of the state we secure thee.
ARDUSOFFE (uncovering his face, and speaking in his natural voice). I make no resistance to the will of the state, signified to me by such a worthy member thereof.
KRANZBERG. Ardusoffe!
ARDUSOFFE. Yea, the same, and thy accomplice in endeavouring to persuade a prisoner to escape from the hands of justice. (Seeing him look round significantly to Corman, who, thereupon, draws the other men to a distance.) [25]   What, art thou afraid those men should hear us; thou who art so free and open, even to imprudence? Thou wilt become a character of perfection by and by, since thou correctest thy errors so completely.
KRANZBERG. Is Van Maurice then so assured of his innocence that he refuses to fly?
ARDUSOFFE. Yes; right well assured of that or of thy perfidy; either assurance was sufficient; and if the one be as well grounded as the other, there is a
[Page 240]
higher agent at work for his deliverance than thou hast any knowledge of.
KRANZBERG. What agent?
ARDUSOFFE. Providence, which protects the innocent, and returns the cruelty of the wicked into his own portion.
KRANZBERG. Art thou become his confessor, too? Why dost thou detain me here with thy homilies?
ARDUSOFFE (smiling archly). Being so artless thyself, thou canst not possibly guess my reason.
KRANZBERG (furiously). He has escaped! Ho, there!—to the search! to the pursuit! the prisoner has escaped. ( Corman and the others run to him, and he gives them orders confusedly.) Go by the street, no—by the south walk—no, no, give the alarm there— lose not a moment.
                                         [Great bustle; running different ways, while the alarm bell rings from the tower.] ARDUSOFFE (aside, as he goes off). [50]   Let him take this alarm for his pains: would what he apprehends were true!
                                         [Exit.
[Page 241]
CORMAN (to Kranzberg ). Perhaps it would be better to enter the prison first, and ascertain if the prisoner be really absent from his cell.
KRANZBERG. Thou'rt right; let us go immediately.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE VI. The House of the Senior Judge. Enter the Judge with a paper in his hand, followed by his Secretary. JUDGE. (as they enter). And tell my worthy colleague that I wish to have a conference with him, as soon as possible, on the subject of this petition to put off the trial for a month. It comes from those who must at least be treated with respect. What noise is that without? Go, see what it is.
                                         [Exit Secretary. While the Judge employs himself reading other papers, re-enter Secretary. SECRETARY. There has been an attempt to favour the prisoner's
[Page 242]
escape, and the whole neighbourhood has been in commotion.
JUDGE. But he has not escaped?
SECRETARY. They believe not. Shall I go with the message?
JUDGE. By no means, till we see how the matter stands. Enter Kranzberg. You come in good time, Kranzberg: know you any thing of this escape, or attempted escape, of Van Maurice?
KRANZBERG. An escape has no doubt been attempted, and has been as certainly foiled. But there is such a confusion of accounts, that it would be difficult to come at the real truth, as is generally the case in such matters.
JUDGE. It is very bad to petition for delay, and in the mean time attempt to elude justice.
KRANZBERG. The cause, I fear, is desperate, and that must
[Page 243]
[25]   be their excuse who counsel the unhappy man; and it is for you now to consider whether, after this account, any request for deferring the trial should be granted.
JUDGE. Granted! most assuredly not. Ought it to be?
KRANZBERG. It becomes not me to give any opinion as to that, though I must confess it might be dangerous: my errand here has a different object.
JUDGE. Speak out, worthy Kranzberg; what is it?
KRANZBERG. It is my earnest request that, in judging of my unhappy kinsman, you would cast this attempt from your consideration altogether, and let no mention of it be made in court.
JUDGE. Is it not an additional proof of guilt?
KRANZBERG. Nay, my very learned and excellent Sir, do not so consider it. Who would not, in similar circumstances, with such strong presumptive evidence against him, do the same thing, even if he were conscious of being innocent? Life is
[Page 244]
sweet to every one, and the jeopardy of it appalling.
JUDGE. Thy humanity equals thy candour.—But thou art too tender on this point.
KRANZBERG. Do not say so, my excellent Sir. Let not this untoward attempt act on your mind to the prejudice [50]   of my miserable kinsman, if other evidence be not sufficient to condemn him.
JUDGE. Let it be as thou wilt, then; but we must have no delays. The trial shall commence tomorrow at the hour which was originally fixed. Excuse me, I am busy now; good night.
                                         [Exit. KRANZBERG. Well, thanks to my good stars! I am not baffled, though I have been deceived. Matters still go as I wish.
                                         [Exit.
[Page 245]
ACT III. SCENE I. — Van Maurice's House; an Anteroom in the Apartment of Rosella. Enter Margaret and a Maid Servant, by opposite sides. MARGARET. I hope thy lady is still asleep?
MAID. O, no! I wish she were. She called me a few minutes since, and I am going to her again.
MARGARET. Is she aware how long she has slept?
MAID. No; she thinks it still early, and I have not undeceived her.
MARGARET. Thou hast done right, Jeanette. Ha! she is up already!
Enter Rosella. ROSELLA. I have had a deep and death-like sleep. It
[Page 246]
was strange that I should sleep so at such a time as this.
MARGARET. And you feel yourself refreshed, I hope?
ROSELLA. I know not: I waked in confused bewilderment, which gave me a few moments of idiot-like insensibility; but the dismal truth broke upon me at once: it was the blow of a leaden mace upon my breast; I had better not have slept at all. But I am early enough to get to him ere he leave the prison. (Looking at a timepiece on the wall of the room.) Good heaven! it is long past the hour! he is already at the court, and I have not seen him. Why was I not called? Bring me my mantle. No, I'll stay for nothing.
                                         [As she is about to go off, she is stopped by the entering of a Servant.] SERVANT. There is a person below, who would speak [25]   with you, lady, on particular and important business.
ROSELLA. His business should be such, indeed, who comes at an hour like the present.
MARGARET (to Servant). Didst thou ever see him before?

[Page 247]
SERVANT. I can scarcely say, Madam; his face is so concealed by his bonnet and the buttoned-up collar of his cloak: but he is tall, and somewhat stately.
ROSELLA. Let him come to me immediately.                                          [Exit Servant. (To Margaret and the Maid.) Leave me; I would see him alone.
MARGARET. I dare not leave you, you tremble so.
ROSELLA. Don't mind that, but leave me.
                                         [Exit Margaret, &c.
If it should be! I fear—why do I fear?
Should I not wish it earnestly? Wild thought!
For such a quick return no natural means
Could have effected: him it cannot be. Enter Claudien in disguise.                                          [She remains motionless, eyeing him from head to foot, while he looks round to ascertain that there be nobody in the room, and then discovers himself, on which she utters a suppressed cry.]
Thou here! O, Claudien, wherefore art thou come?
[Page 248]

But oh! I know it well;—thou should'st be here.
My brother must not die. CLAUDIEN.
Must not, and shall not, be thou well assured.
Thou know'st it then; he has to thee reveal'd? ROSELLA.
To me nor no one else has he reveal'd it. CLAUDIEN.
Yet is it known to thee. ROSELLA.
I have by instinct learnt it. This poor heart!
Fear and affection have divined the truth.
[50]   The horror he express'd when I proposed
To write to thee and hasten thy return,
Came like a flash of lightning on my mind,
And then the truth was instantly reveal'd. CLAUDIEN.
Noble Van Maurice! generous, matchless friend!
Be comforted, my dearest; he is safe. ROSELLA.
But thou art not—O, thou art not, my Claudien!                                          (Wringing her hands distractedly.)
Alas, alas! we're dreadfully beset.
The innocent must not die; and with the guilty
[Page 249]

Is twined the dearest chord of my existence.
Oh, words of misery! to call thee guilty! (Taking his hands and pressing them tenderly.)
There has been blood upon these hands—I know it;
But 'twas the blood of a fell enemy
Who would have shed thy blood; and may I not
Press them and bless thee still? CLAUDIEN.
Thou precious creature! thy affection gleams
Like sunshine through one solitary loophole,
In a dark firmament of gather'd clouds,
That gilds one spot of ocean, hill or plain,
With brightness beautiful though circumscribed.
Thou cheer'st my soul, and be thou also cheer'd!
I must and I will save thy brother's life.
And for that thou hast made my own so precious,
I will be wary to preserve it also. ROSELLA.
Yes, thou shalt live; for heaven has been thy help,
[75]   Else thou couldst never, in so short a time,
Have reach'd this shore again. CLAUDIEN.
The gale was rough; the ship was driven back
Upon the breakers of a rocky shore;
But I swam stoutly, and, when quite exhausted,
I caught a floating raft and gain'd the shore.
[Page 250]
ROSELLA.
'T was Providence preserved thee: thanks to Heaven!
And will preserve thee still. CLAUDIEN.
                                         That is my trust. ROSELLA.
But, O, be cautious! I will go forthwith
And to the Court declare the simple truth,
As to the deed, yet speaking of thee still
As one far distant in another land.
I am bold now; I am braced for the task;
Trust it to me. CLAUDIEN.
Forbear, thou heart of tenderness and courage!
I've better means than this to save thy brother. ROSELLA (eagerly).
And save thyself besides? CLAUDIEN.
Yes, even so; my life is precious now:
Thou'st made it so. There is no time, my love,
For further explanation. Fare thee well!
I'm glad that I have seen thee first; have heard
Thy words of strong affection, and have felt
This dear and gentle hand press'd to my heart.
Farewell, farewell!
[Page 251]
ROSELLA.
[100]   Thy voice sounds sadly, as though many a league
Were going to divide us. How is this?
Farewell pronounced with such solemnity! CLAUDIEN.
But there be other obstacles than distance
May separate the dearest. ROSELLA.
I apprehend thee well;—the prison's walls,—
The dungeon and the chain.—O, God of heaven!
(Seizing him wildly.) Thou shalt not go; thou shalt not leave this house:
I'll lock thee up within my chamber; go
To this dread Court myself; I have no fear,
For Heaven will teach me what I ought to say
When I am there; will give me words of power
To save a brother's life—ay, and a life
Dear as a brother's. Now I feel assuredly
I shall prevail. There is no time to lose:
Go to my chamber; haste thee to the cover.                                          (Dragging him to the door of an inner room.) CLAUDIEN.
Art thou not mad, Rosella? ROSELLA (dragging him still).
Not mad; but thou wilt make me so: haste, haste—
[Page 252]

Alas! I have no strength; but let my weakness
Compel thee, generous Claudien!                                          (Kneeling to him.) CLAUDIEN.
Dear love! alarm bereaves thee of thy reason,
If thou believ'st thy chamber would protect me.
Shouldst thou before the judges speak of me,
As of an absent man! would they believe thee?
Thy servants too; they have admitted here
[125]   A stranger muffled up in mystery,
And must confess they saw him not depart.
Thou'lt run me into danger from the dread
And apprehension of it.—
Withhold me not; I will be very prudent;
I will not rashly risk my life. No longer
Must I remain; moments are precious now;
Let me depart. ROSELLA.
Go instantly; I am a hateful wretch
To keep thee here so long.                                          (Catching hold of him as he hurries off.)
Button thee closer, take this handkerchief,
And press it to thy mouth like one in pain.                                          (Giving a handkerchief.) CLAUDIEN.
I thank thee, kind Rosella. (Going.)
[Page 253]
ROSELLA (running after him again).
Halt in thy gait, and stoop thy shoulders too;
Thy step and graceful bearing will betray thee. CLAUDIEN.
Trust me, my love; I'll not betray myself.                                          [Exit.                                          [ Rosella alone, who continues to pace to and fro in a hurried way, and presently Margaret enters.] MARGARET.
My dear friend— ROSELLA.
Who art thou? MARGARET.
                                         Dost thou not know me?
I met the stranger going hence, and thought
I might return to thee: have I done wrong?                                          [ Rosella gives no answer, but walks about as before.]
Move not so rapidly, my dear Rosella,
But let thy body have a little rest. ROSELLA.
Cease! thou art foolish; should my body rest,
My mind would go distracted. MARGARET.
[150]   Walk as much as thou wilt within thy chamber,
Where no one will observe thee. Take my arm—
Heaven aid and pity thee, poor sufferer,
There is a cruel conflict in thy breast.                                          [Exeunt.
[Page 254]
SCENE II. A narrow Lobby or Passage, leading to the Hall of Justice. Several People discovered, passing or loitering about. Enter Father Francis. FATHER FRANCIS (to an Under Officer). Stop, friend: thou art from the court?
OFFICER. Ay, with half the learning even of a monk, you may guess that.
FATHER FRANCIS. Thou shalt enjoy thy joke unanswered, Officer. Thou art by office indifferent to the fate of an unhappy panel; but thou wert an obliging fellow once, before thou wert spoilt by preferment, and now thou canst do me a favour.
OFFICER. Mention it, good Father. I ought to have reverenced your cloth for your sake, if I do not reverence you for the sake of your cloth.

[Page 255]
FATHER FRANCIS. Has the advocate for the prisoner finished his defence?
OFFICER. Ay, Heaven be thanked! I thought it would never have an end. He has just concluded it.
FATHER FRANCIS. Return to the court, then, and desire him to come to me here, without loss of time. I have something of importance to communicate to him.
OFFICER. I will, Father.
                                         [Exit. FATHER FRANCIS. Woe is me that human nature should come to this! The pride and spirits of that creature, now, rise on an occasion like this. The condemnation or execution of a fellow-creature [25]   creates no other feeling in him but the enjoyment of increased importance and comparative security! Yet there was some good in him once. (Pauses thoughtfully.) There was good in him once: his first confession consisted of one petty crime, for which he seemed to be most penitent. But the steps of the confessional is a spot which he has long forsaken.

[Page 256]
Enter Ardusoffe. ARDUSOFFE. You have something to communicate, good Father?
FATHER FRANCIS. Move a little this way: I have words for thy ear in secret.
ARDUSOFFE. Has any thing occurred to throw light on this mystery? any thing in favour of my unhappy client? who comports himself with the sober dejection of a man resigned to his fate, though he firmly asserts his innocence; and I, so help me God! as firmly believe him.
FATHER FRANCIS. I am glad thou dost.
ARDUSOFFE. I could sit down and weep for his sake, he has so wound himself round my heart in the course of this dismal transaction.
FATHER FRANCIS. Be comforted, my son; thou canst do better things for him than that.
ARDUSOFFE. Instruct me, reverend Father.

[Page 257]
FATHER FRANCIS. [50]   Produce in court the voluntary evidence of his confessor.
ARDUSOFFE. How is this? You said to me last night that he had confessed nothing.
FATHER FRANCIS. There is no time to question me on this point now. I shall presently present myself before the judges, as evidence to exculpate the prisoner; and when the oath has been administered— I pray thee move further this way: we may be overheard.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE III. The Hall of Justice. Two Judges sitting in state; the Prisoner at the Bar; Kranzberg and Borion, and all the Attendants, &c. of a full Court. SENIOR JUDGE. Maurice Van Maurice, baron and citizen of this imperial city, we have heard your defence from the mouth of your advocate, pled with eloquence and ability, though opposed to much strong uncontradicted evidence against you: is
[Page 258]
there any thing further which you wish to urge in your own behalf?
                                         [ Van Maurice remains silent.] JUNIOR JUDGE. Baron; if you can offer any good plea why the sentence of the law should not be pronounced against you, as the murderer of your kinsman, Baron Hartman, let not this opportunity pass. We must otherwise proceed without delay.
VAN MAURICE. Most honourable judges: The evidences against me are so strong, that I am compelled to confess, were such insufficient to convict a prisoner, there is scarcely a panel who at this or any other bar could be convicted. I have nothing to urge against your sentence, but that which I know you cannot and ought not to receive,—a simple and unqualified assertion of mine own innocence.
SENIOR JUDGE. There is no occasion to say further.
VAN MAURICE. Pardon me, my Lord, there is occasion; and I am permitted so to do.
SENIOR JUDGE. [25]   Proceed, then.

[Page 259]
VAN MAURICE. I am well aware that an assertion of mine own innocence cannot be received for my exculpation, even when I recall to your consideration, that I am the son of an honourable father, who has served the state in the senate and the field, and shed his blood for that service in the only way in which it becomes blood to be shed, that is derived from a source so honourable: that I have been reared under his eye, in rectitude and truth, which has never yet on any occasion been impugned: that love of worldly wealth, the only motive for committing the crime with which I am charged, is a propensity from which I am known to be altogether free. It cannot, I repeat, be received for my exculpation, but may surely, when joined to such considerations, well justify your acceding to my earnest request, that you would grant me three weeks' delay, ere your verdict be pronounced, that I may if possible prove mine innocence.

Yes, I request it earnestly; for who,
Of woman born, shrinks not from death inflicted
Before the gazing eyes of multitudes,—
Inflicted with disgrace. I do entreat you,
[50]   For that I leave behind me those most dear,
Who will, if such my punishment, receive
A stroke more terrible than headsman's axe,
The wretch's momentary bane, can give.—
[Page 260]

I do beseech ye, for that ye yourselves
Hereafter may be wrung with deep compunction,
When the good citizens of Lubeck, moved
With gratitude for the brave father, coupled
With pity for the son of such a parent,
Shall scowl upon ye as you pass along
Her public streets, as those who, in his misery,
Denied some weeks of respite to the offspring
Of their once loved commander.
I do appeal to all within these walls,
The citizens of this my native city;
I do appeal to every honest man
Of whate'er town or kingdom; yea, to those
Who, banish'd forth from the community
Of social man, have but the forest waste
For their wild home, and for their polity
The light of untaught reason, whether this,
Your pitiless refusal of my suit,
Be not at enmity with every sympathy
Of common nature. I appeal to all. MANY VOICES (at once). He's right, he's right; he speaks good reason, [75]   sooth!
SENIOR JUDGE. Silence in the court.
VAN MAURICE (looking round on the spectators).
Ye pity me, and I do thank you for it.
[Page 261]

I know I shall hereafter be restored
To lost esteem and good men's love.—Alas!
The fisherman in his small boat, when drifted
To the wild cat'ract's brink, is seen no more
Till, from the boiling nether gulph cast up,
Amid the fierce turmoil of warring eddies,
Jagg'd rocks and churning foam, a sorry sight
Of mangled, stripp'd, and sever'd limbs appears.
I may be so restored, with praise shed o'er me
As unavailing as the rainbow tints,
That through the cat'ract's cloudy spray may gleam
Upon the perish'd wretch. Enter Ardusoffe and Father Francis. SENIOR JUDGE. Again I say, keep silence in the court! (Turning to the prisoner.) You aver that you are innocent; and if this be so, it is at least known to you, who is the guilty person. Name him, then, that justice may take its course, and you shall have full time allowed you to prove your assertion. Refusing to do this, you become your own destroyer, and have no right to cast the blame upon us.
VAN MAURICE. I have said, my Lords, that I cannot do this [100]   without betraying confidence; and were I to do so, should I deserve to be believed in any
[Page 262]
thing I might reveal? He who betrays confidence to save himself, may utter falsehoods also from the same urgent temptation.
SENIOR JUDGE. And this is your determination?
                                         [ Van Maurice bows.] JUNIOR JUDGE. You screw your sense of honour, noble Baron, to the romantic pitch. Consider better of it. Is this your final determination? [ Van Maurice bows again.] Then, though most painfully, we must proceed to give sentence as the law directs.
ARDUSOFFE (advancing). Stop, my Lords. In this extremity, I am warranted to bring forward evidence to exculpate my client, which might not otherwise have been justifiable. This holy Father hath that to reveal which concerns the life and honour of the prisoner, and I claim that he may be heard.
SENIOR JUDGE. Reveal penitential confessions!
ARDUSOFFE. Yes, my Lord, to save the life of an innocent person; and show me that law of God or man which forbids it.

[Page 263]
JUNIOR JUDGE. He must speak upon oath.
ARDUSOFFE. Let it be administered to him as you please.
SENIOR JUDGE. Let him be sworn.
                                         [ Father Francis is led to the further end of the hall, where the oath is administered to him in dumb show. He then advances slowly to the front, as if unwell.] ARDUSOFFE. [125]   What is the matter, good father?
FATHER FRANCIS. I am somewhat faint; may I be permitted to withdraw for a few moments?
ARDUSOFFE (after looking to the Judges, who nod assent). You are permitted.
                                         [Exit Father Francis. KRANZBERG. This monk, methinks, is strangely seized on the sudden. Will a lie or two choke a friar?
ARDUSOFFE (to Kranzberg ). If thou canst find one man in Lubeck who doubts the veracity of Father Francis, make that a plea for setting aside his evidence: thou hast my leave to do so.

[Page 264]
VAN MAURICE (aside to Ardusoffe ). Has Father Francis confessed any one concerned in this matter?
ARDUSOFFE (aside to Van Maurice ). Why else should he volunteer this evidence?
After a pause, enter Claudien, disguised as Father Francis. SENIOR JUDGE. Declare to us what thou knowest of this atrocious deed.
CONFESSOR. That which is only known to Heaven, the prisoner, and myself, I will declare; and nothing but the truth shall pass these lips.
SENIOR JUDGE. Proceed without further prelude.
CONFESSOR. The panel at your bar was, on the fatal evening when Baron Hartman was slain—
KRANZBERG. Gentle expression! I should say—murdered.
JUNIOR JUDGE. Interrupt not the witness.
CONFESSOR. Well, be it termed as you please. I say, he, your panel, was the whole of that evening
[Page 265]
[150]   shut up within the walls of his own library, when Count Claudien, his friend, entered the room by a private door from the garden, with blood on his hands and agony in his heart.
VAN MAURICE. Thou liest, false priest! I made to thee no such confession. Mine own sins, and mine own alone, were revealed to thee. (To the Judges.) Regard not what he says, for he is perjured.
JUNIOR JUDGE. Silence! do not interrupt him: it is for us to judge of this matter. (To the Confessor.) Proceed.
CONFESSOR. He entered, as I have said, with blood upon his hands, and told, in much agony of mind, to this, your noble prisoner, that he had been, a short half-hour before, attacked near the ramparts by Baron Hartman, who rushed furiously upon him with his drawn sword: that they fought, and Hartman was disarmed; upon which he treacherously drew his dagger, attempting to stab him; but he, this Claudien, being the stronger man, threw the other upon the ground, and bent over him with one knee upon his breast. (A pause.)

[Page 266]
SENIOR JUDGE. Proceed; art thou ill again?
ARDUSOFFE. He will recover breath presently; give him time.
CONFESSOR. [175]   In this position were those unfortunate adversaries, when Hartman, in passion, uttered words most false and injurious of a lady beloved by Claudien; upon which, this unhappy Claudien drew his own dagger from his belt, and stabbed him to the heart. That was the blood-stained dagger found in the apartment of Van Maurice.
VAN MAURICE.
I can forbear no longer; if this monk
Tell such a tale as drawn from my confession,
By all most sacred held in earth or heaven,
He lies a thousand times! CONFESSOR. But wilt thou also swear that Claudien came not into thy library on that fatal night, and told thee a story similar to that which I now repeat?
VAN MAURICE.
Do not beset me thus! the Count is absent,
And cannot now defend himself. Whatever
May be your good intentions in my favour,
As friendly aid I utterly reject them.
[Page 267]
KRANZBERG. Will any one be fooled by such bungling jugglers playing into one another's hands so palpably?
BORION. Most honourable Judges, I think you cannot admit of such evidence as this. There is collusion here.
SENIOR JUDGE. Is there any farther evidence to produce? (A pause.) I presume there is none.
                                         [The Judges confer closely together in dumb show, while the Prisoner and others speak in an under-voice.] VAN MAURICE (beckoning to the Confessor). [200]   Come this way, friar.
KRANZBERG. No speaking privately to a witness in court.
ARDUSOFFE. The evidence being closed, it may now be admitted.
VAN MAURICE.
Come hither, stealthy monk, for holy father
I never more may call thee. (Beckoning as before.)
[Confessor goes nearer.] So unwilling!
What fiend of darkness hast thou tamper'd with?
[Page 268]

No earthly man but one could to thy ear
What thou reveal'st convey, and he's far distant. CONFESSOR (in a low voice to Van Maurice ).
Not far distant, Maurice.                                          [ Van Maurice pushes him away, and with an eager expression of countenance points to the door; then sitting hastily down, remains in a stooping posture, covering his face with his hands.] KRANZBERG (to Ardusoffe ). We shall know presently what all those juggling deceptions of yours will produce. Thou hast trained thy actors to admiration. But honesty is the best policy after all; this good saying I have always maintained.
ARDUSOFFE. As far as words will go, sapient Sir; and the fate of thy last night's treachery has confirmed it. A laudable consistency of character, when both words and actions teach the same lesson.
VAN MAURICE (starting up). They are long of coming to a decision.
ARDUSOFFE. Nay, they have consulted but a little while.
VAN MAURICE. I have sat on that bench a long time.

[Page 269]
ARDUSOFFE. But a few minutes, dear Baron.
VAN MAURICE (looking to Confessor, who stands at a distance). Not yet gone!
ARDUSOFFE. Did you expect him to go?
VAN MAURICE. [225]   My understanding had left me: I knew not what to expect.
ARDUSOFFE. Hush! the Judges are preparing to pronounce sentence.
VAN MAURICE (looking up fearfully). Is it for life or death? (Averting his eyes hastily.) It is not life.
SENIOR JUDGE. Baron Van Maurice, having duly considered the evidence against you, and that also which has been produced in your favour, we feel ourselves constrained to pronounce upon you the sentence of the law. And forasmuch as murders have, of late years, become more frequent amongst people of noble condition, we see good to revive, upon this occasion, a law which has been too long laid aside.—Maurice Van Maurice, for this atrocious murder which you have committed,
[Page 270]
we condemn you to be broken alive upon the wheel; and to-morrow, before mid-day, this sentence shall be executed on your mortal body. May God be merciful to your immortal soul, which you have put into such fearful jeopardy!
                                         [ Van Maurice stands motionless on the spot; a murmur of horror sounds through the hall, Kranzberg alone looking triumphant; while the the Confessor sinks into the arms of Ardusoffe, who prevents him from falling on the ground.] OFFICER OF THE COURT. Undo his cowl, and give him a cup of water.
ARDUSOFFE (drawing his cowl still closer). Let him alone. It is only a momentary weakness: he revives.
CONFESSOR (aside to Ardusoffe ). Let go thy hold: I am well now, and think I [250]   shall be strong. (Advancing with a stately step in front of the Judges.) My Lords, I needs must strongly raise my voice against this sentence which ye have pronounced upon a man most innocent.

O, more than innocent! a man most virtuous.
Ay, more than virtuous; e'en to honour's summit
Most nobly raised, whereon he stands aloft,
[Page 271]

'Twixt heaven and earth, so godlike, that the mind
Scarcely believes this nether world of sin
Hath been his previous home.—He is most guiltless. SENIOR JUDGE. What proof givest thou of this, and who art thou who hast twice this day addressed us with mien and air so varied, and two such different voices?—
CONFESSOR (dropping his disguise). The man who did the deed: the unhappy Claudien.
SENIOR JUDGE. And thou confessest thyself to be the murderer of Hartman?
CLAUDIEN.
You call it murder—so it may be called.
He at the moment lay unarm'd; I, therefore,
Can make no plea of self-defence. But murder,
Deliberately devised, ne'er stain'd these hands:
And if there be a man in this assembly
Who loves a virtuous woman—such, I trow,
[275]   In every court and crowd are to be found—
Let him declare how he should feel on hearing
Her fair name outraged by a sland'rous tongue,
The caitiff struggling to elude his grasp:
And if a fatal stroke by rage inflicted
[Page 272]

He can in conscience deem deliberate bloodshed,
Being so circumstanced, I am a murderer. JUNIOR JUDGE. How camest thou hither? Didst thou not sail in the Mermaid, bound for Copenhagen?
CLAUDIEN. I did: but agony of mind wrung from me, unawares, some words of exclamation and disclosure, which one of the crew overheard; and when that tempest, which lately rocked your walls, began to vex our course, and put the ship in peril, this man accused me as a murderer. The frightened mariners would no longer share the risk with such an unblessed passenger, and I was cast into the deep.
JUNIOR JUDGE. Fearful extremity! How wert thou preserved?
CLAUDIEN.
I swam while strength remain'd, and then embraced
A floating plank, which bore me to the land.
The tempest and the sea had pity on me;
And will ye then destroy what they have spared?
I beg for mercy: I am not ashamed
To ask, ay, to implore your clemency;
[Page 273]

[300]   For, guilty as I am, I am so circumstanced
That life is dear to me.                                          (Pointing to Van Maurice, who is now on his knees, stretching out his hands to the Judges, but unable to speak.) And see, who kneels before you! one who knelt not for his own life; who never, till this moment, bent his honoured knee but to that Almighty Judge, who hath commanded weak and erring men to be merciful, that they may obtain mercy.
                                         [The Judges whisper to one another.] JUNIOR JUDGE. Thy case, Count Claudien, is piteous, though thou art very guilty. We must withdraw awhile before we make any reply to thy appeal for mercy.
                                         [The Judges withdraw.]                                          [ Claudien, turning to Van Maurice, spreads out his arms, and the latter, rushing into them, strains him to his bosom.] VAN MAURICE. Who would not live or die for such a man? My noble friend! but thou shalt live. The very stones of these walls will cry out against them, if they have not mercy on thee.
KRANZBERG. If the Judges suffer themselves to be deluded
[Page 274]
with all this mummery, they are no true successors of King Solomon.
VAN MAURICE. Deceit dwells within thine own miserable breast, and thou perceivest deceit in every thing.
KRANZBERG. There is little penetration required in this case. It is a mighty convenient thing to have the dagger of a friend and brother-in-law to clear one's way to a rich inheritance.
VAN MAURICE. Thou liest most foully and most wickedly.
KRANZBERG (drawing from his cloak a concealed weapon, and rushing furiously on him). [325]   The lie to me! thou half-condemned felon!
CLAUDIEN (doing the same, and putting himself between them). Attack an unarmed man, thou hellish caitiff!                                          [They fight, and Ardusoffe and others endeavour to part them, but cannot effect it, till Claudien has run Kransberg through the body, and received a wound from him.] This hand of mine is fated to shed blood. Caitiff as he is, I wish I had not slain him.

[Page 275]
ARDUSOFFE. See how he gathers in his wrung and withering features, as if he cursed us all in the very agonies of death.
CLAUDIEN. Say not so! say not so! Who can divine the thoughts of a dying man, be he ever so wicked? —He is dead now, and I may soon be as him.
VAN MAURICE (alarmed). What sayest thou? There is blood from thy side: thou art wounded.
CLAUDIEN. I am faint and sick: let me have air, I pray you.
Re-enter the Judges, and resume their seats. SENIOR JUDGE. This is our decision. Forasmuch as the murder of Hartman was not a premeditated act, but perpetrated, though unjustifiably, in a moment of provocation and passion; and further, that the criminal hath delivered himself up to justice, making full confession of the crime, we remit the punishment of death, and condemn the Count Claudien of Denmark to perpetual banishment from the city and territories of Lubeck. In four and twenty hours from this time, thou must
[Page 276]
depart. Being ever again seen within the realm, [350]   after that period, death, according to the utmost rigour of the law, is thy portion.
CLAUDIEN. I thank your clemency. If my soul and body keep together so long, I will obey you; but if otherwise, ye will not refuse to my mortal remains a spot of earth for their resting-place, and the dust of your land to cover them.—This is my request:—that I lie—may lie where my friend— (Struggling in vain to keep down his emotion.) —I thank your clemency.
                                         (Is supported by Van Maurice. ) JUNIOR JUDGE (descending hastily from his seat). What means this? has he slain himself?— And who lies here? Kranzberg dead, and bathed in blood! Such outrage in a court of justice!—Who permitted it? Every one present is answerable to the law for this.
ARDUSOFFE. Kranzberg, in the rage of disappointment, was, as Borion and all here present can witness, the aggressor. We endeavoured to separate them, but ere we could effect it, these bleeding wounds were given and received.

[Page 277]
Enter Rosella, joyfully. ROSELLA.
I have heard it—I have heard the joyful tidings! (To Van Maurice. )
Thou art acquitted and Claudien not condemn'd.
Ay, well may'st thou so hold him to thy heart!
I will embrace ye both. VAN MAURICE.
Forbear, dear sister; do not press upon him. ROSELLA.
[375]   What is the matter? There is no joy here.
Claudien, thou'rt very pale; there's blood upon thee.
O, misery, misery! (Wringing her hands.) VAN MAURICE. Do not give way to such frantic lamentations; he is severely wounded, but may yet recover. Have patience and do not distract him with outrageous sorrow.
ROSELLA.
I will be patient! yes, I will be patient!
'T is Heaven chastises; I will bear it meekly.
But is there yet for me no sound of kindness,—
No dear word of affection, gentle Claudien,
From thy pale lips, so pale and so compress'd?
[Page 278]

Alas, alas! thou look'st upon the ground,
And dost not look at me! VAN MAURICE. He is very faint, and hears not what thou sayest.
                                         [She embraces the knees of Claudien, who sinks slowly to the ground, supported by Van Maurice and Ardusoffe, and the curtain drops.]
[Page 485]
Back matter NOTE TO “THE HOMICIDE.” As it has been thought, by a gentleman professionally conversant on these subjects, that the scene on board of ship is only fitted for a melodrama, and perhaps with justice, I have subjoined what follows, to be substituted in its room by any manager of a theatre, who may be of the same opinion, and who may, at the same time, consider this drama as worthy of representation. The simplest way, no doubt, would have been to have omitted the objectionable part altogether, and to have placed the following scenes in the body of the piece; but as my own opinion on the subject does not entirely coincide with that above mentioned, I have preferred this mode of removing the difficulty. Since our two principal theatres are of such large dimensions, and possess so many capabilities of effect from scenery and from light, I can see no reason why some of the divisions of a regular drama may not occasionally receive the advantage of such powerful auxiliaries. And, indeed, I am scarcely entitled to call this a regular piece, consisting, as it does, of three acts, and written chiefly in prose, that it might be the better adapted to a large theatre, in which blank verse cannot be so readily understood.

[Page 486]
Scene 1 SCENE I. The Entrance-hall of a small Inn on the Sea-shore: knocking heard at the Door. Enter Landlady. LANDLADY. Who can it be, making such a noise at this untimely hour? (In a loud voice.) What do you want at this late hour? and who are you?
VOICE (without). I am a storm-beaten, benighted traveller, and shelter for the night is what I want, good dame; open your door and receive me.
LANDLADY. You travel late for a lone person. (Opens the door.) Enter Claudien. Come in, then, and I will do the best I can for you. The rain must have fallen in torrents, methinks, to put you in this condition.
CLAUDIEN. Yes, I have had water enough, good dame; let me dry myself by the fire, if there be one still burning in the house.
LANDLADY (after looking at him steadfastly). Preserve me! is the Mermaid gone a wreck?

[Page 487]
CLAUDIEN. What sayest thou of the Mermaid?
LANDLADY. She sailed from port yesterday morning, and my poor boy is on board.
CLAUDIEN. Where he is still in safety, I doubt not; so make thyself easy, and blow up the embers of thy fire, that I may dry myself.
LANDLADY. Lord be gracious to me! Did I not see thee embark with the other passengers?—If that ship be sailing on the sea, what art thou? (He remains silent, and she looks at him still more intently.) In the name of the blessed Saints, depart from me! thou art nothing now that either fire may warm or roof may shelter. Leave me, in the holy name of St. Francis!
CLAUDIEN. Nay, if thou deny me succour, in my present condition, thou wilt make a ghost of me, indeed. Let me pass on to the fire, I beseech thee!
                                         [Exit, passing her quickly, and she follows him, holding up her hands in amazement. SCENE II. The Sea-shore by early dawn. Enter Mariners and Passengers, carrying small packages and various matters in their hands. FIRST PASSENGER. Thank God we are on dry land again, though we be driven back to the same coast.

[Page 488]
FIRST MARINER. And ship and cargo safe, too; you may thank me for that.
SECOND MARINER. Thank thee for it!
FIRST MARINER. Ay, marry! had we not lightened our vessel of that unhallowed murderer, she and all she contained would have been, long ere now, at the bottom.
FIRST PASSENGER. Say no more of that: it makes the blood turn in my veins to think of it. If all the unhallowed part of our living freight had been so disposed of, we should have come to shore most grievously curtailed of our numbers.
Enter Landlady, with a small basket. THIRD MARINER. By our blessed Lady! there comes my mother.
LANDLADY. My dear boy! art thou safe? Thou hast had a sad bout of it on that stormy sea, since I parted with thee yesterday morning.
FIRST MARINER. Good landlady, we are in want of food and a good fire to warm us by; show us the nearest way to thy house, which is not far off, as I guess.
LANDLADY (pointing). Hold on your way along the shore, and I'll overtake you presently, when I have gathered a few more of these limpets.
                                         [Exeunt Mariners, &c. Manent only Landlady and Third Mariner.
[Page 489]
THIRD MARINER. May the devil choke them with the first morsel they eat I wish they would to to any house but thine.
LANDLADY. Why dost thou say so, my dear boy?
THIRD MARINER. I'll tell thee a secret, mother; I'll sail with those men no more, if I can effect my escape.
LANDLADY. What makes thee say so?
THIRD MARINER. I'll tell thee why, and in few words, too, though it is a story to make one's ears tingle. There was a noble passenger on board, and when the storm raged at its pitch, and we were in jeopardy, some exclamations which fell from his lips made one who stood near him imagine that he must needs be a murderer.
LANDLADY. Mercy on us! did he own himself such? remorse wrings strange tales from parched lips in the hour of danger.
THIRD MARINER. He confessed having shed blood, but with no deliberate intention; and I could pawn my life upon it that he spoke the truth. Yet those cowardly devils durst not abide the peril of the storm in his company.
LANDLADY (tossing up her arms). And they cast him overboard!
THIRD MARINER. Nay: the stoutest of them all durst not lay a finger on him. He kept them off with his drawn sword, till he gained
[Page 490]
the prow of the ship, which was driving towards land, and then, raising his arms to heaven (I shall never forget the sight of his noble figure as the passing lightning gave it to our eyes for a moment), threw himself into the deep.
LANDLADY. It is, indeed, a fearful tale. But he is no murderer, I'll be sworn to it; and he is safe on shore at this moment, where he would never have been, had he done the deed of blood. He is in my house.
THIRD MARINER. Where those men must not find him. What shall we do?
LANDLADY. Run thou, and give him notice of their coming; and conduct him, if he pleases, to—,where he may get on board of some other vessel, and quit the country undiscovered.
THIRD MARINER. So I will, mother, and go to the world's end with him, too, if he will suffer me.
LANDLADY. Make haste; and I'll overtake those miscreants, and lead them to the house by any way but the nearest.
                                         [Exeunt severally. NOTES
1
ARDUSOFFE
BOATSWAIN
BORION
CAPTAIN
CLAUDIEN
CONFESSOR
CORMAN
FATHER FRANCIS
FIRST MARINER
FIRST OFFICER
FIRST PASSENGER
FIRST SAILOR
FIRST SERVANT
HARTMAN
JACOME
JUDGE
JUNIOR JUDGE
KRANZBERG
KRANZBERG AND SECOND OFFICER
LANDLADY
MAID
MANY VOICES
MARGARET
OFFICER
OFFICER OF THE COURT
OTHER VOICES
ROSELLA
SECOND MARINER
SECOND OFFICER
SECOND SAILOR
SECRETARY
SENIOR JUDGE
SENTINEL
SERVANT
SERVANTS
THIRD MARINER
THIRD SAILOR
TURNKEY
VAN MAURICE
VOICE
VOICES

Title: The homicide (1836)

Publication title: Dramas, By Joanna Baillie. In Three Volumes

Pages: 3 v.

Publication date: 1836

Publication year: 1836

Publisher/Imprint: Printed for Longman, Rees, Orme

Physical description: 3 v.

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: London

Publication subject: Literature

Source type: Book

Language of publication: English

Document type: Book, Tragedy

Document note: The homicide.; Tragedy.; Date first published: 1836.; Date first performed: Unknown or unacted.

Publication note: Preliminaries and introductory matter omitted; The following plays have been taken from this source:; From Vol. I; The Alienated Manor: a comedy. In five acts; From Vol. II; The Stripling: a tragedy. In five acts. Written in prose; Enthusiasm: a comedy. In three acts; From Vol. III; Witchcraft: a tragedy in prose. In five acts; The Homicide: a tragedy in prose, with occasional passages of verse. In three acts; The Match: a comedy. In three acts; .

Accession number: D0100060

ProQuest document ID: 2138577274

Document URL: http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/homicide-1836/docview/2138577274/se-2?accountid=14270

Database: Literature Online

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2022 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions