____________________________________________________________

The match (1836)

Author: Baillie, Joanna

Publication info: Dramas, By Joanna Baillie. In Three Volumes . 3 v. London: Printed for Longman, Rees, Orme, 1836.

http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/match-1836/docview/2138577399/se-2?accountid=14270

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://temple-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/openurl/01TULI/TULI??url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;genre=book&amp;sid=ProQ:ProQ%3Aed&amp;atitle=&amp;title=The+match+%281836%29&amp;issn=&amp;date=1836-01-01&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;spage=371&amp;au=Baillie%2C+Joanna&amp;isbn=&amp;jtitle=&amp;btitle=The+match+%281836%29&amp;rft_id=info:eric/D0100061&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: THE MATCH A COMEDY. IN THREE ACTS.
[Page ]
Front matter 1 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Sir Cameron Kunliffe.
Franklin, Relation to Sir Cameron.
Brightly, Friend to Sir Cameron.
Thornhill, Friend to Sir Cameron.
Master Lawry, an idle urchin, Brother to Emma.
Humphry.
Locksmith, Servants.
WOMEN. Latitia Vane.
Emma, her Niece.
Flounce, Waiting-maid to Latitia.
The Housekeeper of Sir Cameron.
Ladies, Servants, &c.
Scene, a Watering-place, and Sir Cameron's Seat in the neighbourhood.
[Page 371]
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. —A low Parlour in a Lodging-house, with a Glass-door in the bottom of the Stage, opening into a Garden. Enter Brightly and Thornhill. BRIGHTLY (after surveying the room). Yes, these apartments will do very well; and you shall have your study,—if a place with one shelf for books and a commodious chair to sleep in deserves the name,—overhead.
THORNHILL. But you forget the writing-table, the most important thing of all.
BRIGHTLY. Most important, indeed, for a poet who never writes any thing longer than a sonnet, making
[Page 372]
progress at the astonishing rate of one couplet per day. The window-sill might do well enough for that.
THORNHILL. But you think of former times, my friend; rhyming becomes easier by practice.
BRIGHTLY. So it does, like all other things; and I dare say you can now write two couplets per day with no great difficulty.
THORNHILL. Don't trouble thy head about my progress; let us set out on our visit to Sir Cameron. His mansion is scarcely a mile off, I am told. He is a kind-hearted fellow; he will be glad to see us.
BRIGHTLY. Yes, if he do not take it into his head that we have some covert design in our visit.
THORNHILL. Some covert design!
BRIGHTLY. Ay; sounding his intentions as to standing [25]   for the county: propitiating his patronage for some itinerant artist or lecturer: introducing to his acquaintance some forward chaperon, with a troop of female cousins at her back, to invade the daily peace of his home. O dear! what will
[Page 373]
he not imagine, rather than that we are scampering about the country for holiday recreation, and have come ten miles out of our way to see him.
THORNHILL. You are somewhat hard upon him, methinks. Some events of his youth unhappily gave him a bad opinion of mankind; for myself, I never found him suspicious.
BRIGHTLY. If he thought you had wit enough to deceive him, it might be otherwise. You may thank your poetry, my dear Thornhill, for his confidence.
THORNHILL. Nay, spare me, dear Brightly; else I shall suppose thou art a poet thyself, under the rose, and canst not brook a rival.                                          [ Master Lawry, who appears in the garden with a bow and arrow in his hand, discharges his arrow through the glass-door, and breaks one of the panes.] See that urchin in the garden; he has broken a pane of the window, and is running away.
BRIGHTLY. He sha'n't escape, however. (Opens the window, runs after him, and returns dragging in Lawry by the collar). You need not struggle
[Page 374]
with me, little master; I'll keep you fast. Why did you hit the window with your arrow?
LAWRY. [50]   Because I meant to hit the door.
BRIGHTLY. I wish thou hadst been a better marksman. What will the landlady say to thee?
LAWRY. Ay, more words no doubt than I shall care to hear.—Ah, miss Aimy, miss Aimy! how many scrapes I get into by you!
BRIGHTLY. And who is miss Aimy, I pray?
LAWRY. My arrow, Sir: that is the name I give her.
THORNHILL. And a very appropriate one, methinks.
BRIGHTLY. But what is thine own name?
LAWRY. Which of them, Sir?
BRIGHTLY. How many hast thou?
LAWRY. Two godfathers, two grandfathers, and a
[Page 375]
brace of uncles, have furnished me with names enow.—How many do they come to?
THORNHILL. Names enough, no doubt, for any one but a German Prince. What school dost thou attend?
LAWRY. None, sir.
THORNHILL. Who teaches thee to read and write?
LAWRY. Any body,—who has most time and most patience.
THORNHILL. But art thou not to be put to school?
LAWRY. Yes, Sir, when aunt Letty can make up her mind, whether the old floggum way, or the Pestilozi way, or the Hamiltonian fashion, is best for my learning; and whether a high situation, or [75]   a warm situation, or an eastern exposure, or a western exposure, is best for my health; and whether three hundred schoolfellows, or fifty schoolfellows, or twenty schoolfellows, fagging or no fagging, be best for my morals.
BRIGHTLY. Ha! ha! ha! I will not ask whose nephew thou art. And thou hast a pretty sister too.

[Page 376]
LAWRY. Yes, Sir; people do call her pretty, and she is civil enough to believe them.
BRIGHTLY. Out upon thee for a saucy knave!—Thine aunt is here then? And where does she live?
LAWRY. I can't tell you, Sir! When she has found out which of the twenty houses she has been looking at is the cheerfullest, and the cleanest, and the most convenient, I suppose she will settle in it.
BRIGHTLY. Go to her, my little master, and give my best respects, and say that an old friend will do himself the honour of waiting upon her presently.— Nay, you need not look at the broken pane so ruefully; I will satisfy the landlady on that point.                                          (Leads Lawry into the garden, where he disappears amongst the bushes, then returning to the front.) Ha! ha! ha! Well, I can't help laughing for the soul of me.
THORNHILL. What tickles you so much?
BRIGHTLY. Those two originals come in one another's way
[Page 377]
[100]   again. There was a report of a love affair between them several months ago, which went off upon some foolish difficulty or other; and now she comes here to place herself in his neighbourhood.
THORNHILL (aside). I hope it is only to throw herself in his way. (Aloud.) Poh! it will all end, as it did before, in scruples, and fancies, and misapprehensions! Don't you think it will?
BRIGHTLY. I hope not: what a match they would make if it could be effected!
THORNHILL. How! Suspicion and indecision put together as yoke-fellows!
BRIGHTLY. Why not? If they are together, two people may lead an uneasy life, to be sure; but it will, in all probability, save four from being in the like condition.
THORNHILL. It will never be effected.
BRIGHTLY. I'll bet my Rembrandt against your paddock, which I have long coveted for orchard ground, that it will be effected.

[Page 378]
THORNHILL. Well then, I take your bet that it will not.
BRIGHTLY. Hush, hush! Here comes one of the parties concerned.
Enter Sir Cameron Kunliffe. SIR CAMERON. Welcome, Brightly; and Thornhill, also, welcome both to this little by-nook of dissipation! [125]   and when you took your route this way, I flatter myself you remembered that you have an old friend in the neighbourhood.
BRIGHTLY. We did so, Kunliffe, and were now proposing to walk to your house. It is, I believe, within two miles of the village.
SIR CAMERON. A short distance, which I hope you will often traverse, on foot or on horseback, as suits your convenience. I saw your groom at the stable door, Thornhill, rubbing down that beautiful brown nag of yours, and he told me you were here.

[Page 379]
THORNHILL. It is lucky you did; we might have gone to your house else and missed you.
SIR CAMERON. So you might.—Did I not hear you talking of a bet as I entered? You will not be silly enough to bet away that beautiful animal?
THORNHILL. O no! it did not concern the nag.
BRIGHTLY. It neither concerns the nag nor the nag's master; yet it is a bet of some moment too.
SIR CAMERON. No doubt, no doubt; it was foolish in me to think of the paces of a horse, when all the menage of our borough canvassers is approaching, and doubtful enough, I wot, to tempt any better.
THORNHILL. It did not concern the borough neither.
SIR CAMERON. [150]   O! you are close and mysterious, gentlemen.
BRIGHTLY. To give you the pleasure of guessing.
SIR CAMERON. I'faith, you are mistaken in that. What pleasure
[Page 380]
sure should I have in guessing? No man on earth has less curiosity than myself.
BRIGHTLY. I think I have known some men with less: had you said women, I should have assented more readily.
SIR CAMERON. Fy upon thee! both men and women are nine-pins for thy bowl to roll at.
THORNHILL. And he may have good bowling here, I trow; there be men of many conditions in this by-nook of dissipation, as you call it, and I am sure there is one lady, at least, of so many minds and moods, that she may very well stand for twenty.
SIR CAMERON. Your bet concerns a lady, then?
BRIGHTLY. It would be great unthrift to tell you that, who have no curiosity.
SIR CAMERON. Well, well, and you have told it me, though you are not aware of it.

[Page 381]
Enter Mrs. Flounce, coming forward very briskly, and then pretending to draw back in confusion. FLOUNCE. O dear!—I beg pardon, gentlemen.—I knew not you were here—I came in search of Master Lawry. My lady is frightened to death about him,—but she does not know that I am come after him to this hotel.—O! she is in such a [175]   quandary; she did not know where to send me after him: for you know, gentlemen, a child may break his bones or come to mischief anywhere.
SIR CAMERON. Nobody will deny that, Mrs. Flounce.
FLOUNCE. O lud, Sir Cameron! are you in this hotel? But you have a fine house in the neighbourhood, as the waiter tells me,—not that I inquired— I enters into no matters as don't belong to me.
SIR CAMERON. If you had inquired, Mrs. Flounce, I should have taken it as a compliment.
BRIGHTLY. And if your lady had desired you to inquire, it would have been taken as a compliment of double value.

[Page 382]
FLOUNCE. She bid me inquire! how could you think of such a thing, Mr. Brightly, when she expressly forbade me to inquire anything about it?
BRIGHTLY. And you are a woman of discretion, Mrs. Flounce, of very deep discretion. Still keep your lady's counsel as you do now, and you will deserve the best silk gown in her wardrobe.
THORNHILL. And her best garnet brooch into the bargain.
FLOUNCE. Oh, what are silk gowns and brooches to me! Master Lawry! Master Lawry! That child is the plague of our lives. Is he in that there garden? where shall I find him?
BRIGHTLY. [200]   You had better go to the fortune-teller, if there be such a person in the place; he may know about him as well as other stray goods.
FLOUNCE. No, no! I hates fortune-tellers; they have told me so many lies already.—Good morning, gentlemen, I ax your pardon.—I have been very rude; shockingly rude indeed.
                                         [Exit, curtseying herself away to the door.
[Page 383]
SIR CAMERON. But you will both walk to my house as you proposed, and I shall have the pleasure of attending you.
THORNHILL. Have the goodness to wait till we have given some orders about our luggage, and we are at your command.
                                         [Exeunt Brightly and Thornhill. SIR CAMERON (alone). Did not know that my house is in this neighbourhood. —Pretty innocence!—Has she changed plans again?—Does the wind set fair for a second venture?—I might have known she was here by Franklin being so ready to come to me. That girl, Emma, stands between him and his wits. And these two fellows casting up in this corner so unexpectedly, what may this mean? A bet, forsooth! are they after her, too? But be canvassing or courtship the object, they sha'n't encompass me in their snares.
Re-enter Brightly and Thornhill. BRIGHTLY. Now we are ready to follow you.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 384]
SCENE II. An Apartment in Miss Vane's House. Enter Emma, with a small embroidering frame in her hand, which she puts upon the table, followed by Lawry carrying a work-bag. She then sits down to her work. LAWRY. No, no, sister! no work now! you promised I should have some skeins to hold.
EMMA. And you shall hold them all, Lawry, when they are wanted. Am I to wind them before, only to amuse you, as one throws out a ball for the kitten? I must begin this ranunculus with one or other of these bright colours immediately.
LAWRY. And I know why you are in such a hurry.
EMMA. Dost thou, master conjurer?
LAWRY. Ay, marry do I; for if you don't, Aunt Letty
[Page 385]
will come to choose the colour for you, and then it won't be begun for a week. O! here she is; I must get out of the way of her errands, and directions, and re-directions, as fast as I can. I'm sure, if I could keep them all in my head, the learning of Greek would be a joke to me.
Enter Latitia (catching hold of Lawry as he tries to pass). LATITIA. Where art thou going, urchin? hast thou given my message to the coachman?
LAWRY. No, ma'am, but I'll do it immediately, in the very words you spoke. He must be at the back entry ten minutes before two.
LATITIA. No, not quite so soon. (To Emma. ) Shall I say half-past two, my dear, or a quarter before three?—Perhaps that may be too late.—Tell [25]   him half-past two, unless he should—
LAWRY. I'll just give him the first message, Auntie, no more.
                                         [Breaks from her and exit. LATITIA. Impudent little runagate! that child must be put to school forthwith.

[Page 386]
Enter a Servant with letters. But here are my letters, and they will relieve me, I trust, from many perplexities.
EMMA. Yes, my dear aunt, if they do not leave as many behind as they carry away.
LATITIA. Peace, child; thou art so thoughtless that nothing is a perplexity to thee. (Looks at the letters lying on the table.) Ha! here is an answer to my application for the house. (Opens a letter and reads.)
EMMA. And does the landlord agree to your terms?
LATITIA (in a hesitating slow drawl). Ye-s.
EMMA. Then there is one difficulty surmounted.
LATITIA (as before). Ye-s, so far surmounted; but I have been thinking further of it. The drawing-rooms are too large, and my dressing-room is too small, and there is no convenient closet for my curiosities and china.

[Page 387]
EMMA. And will you give it up, after all, just when he agrees to your terms?
LATITIA. Nay, I don't know that. If my own apartment were better, and room for my curiosities, [50]   and if the back staircase were not so miserably narrow, I should not hesitate for a moment.
EMMA. But things are as they are, and cannot be altered; so you must either take the house, with its imperfections, or give it up.
LATITIA. Ay, there it is: he is so unreasonable as to desire an immediate answer. I wish that word immediate were expunged from the vocabulary. If I had time, I could write to Lady Trinkum about it, and likewise Mr. Changet, the best judge of houses in the world; but to commit myself at once—Oh! what is to be done!— What seal is that you are examining so minutely?
EMMA. Two gules reversed on a field azure.
LATITIA (eagerly). Ha! from that quarter! at it again
EMMA. Did you not expect a second proposal when
[Page 388]
your former treaty of marriage broke off because his fortune was deemed insufficient for your fashionable plans of expense?—for, by the unexpected death of his elder brother, some three months ago, that obstacle is removed.
LATITIA (snatching the letter from her hand, and reading it eagerly). Thou art quite right, it is a second proposal; and, oh! what shall I do? (Traversing the room in a disturbed manner.) I shall appear sordid— I shall appear mean—I shall appear mercenary [75]   in his eyes.
EMMA. Not more so than when you declined his first proposal on that ground. You will now appear to him, not very sentimental, indeed, but consistent.
LATITIA. Oh! but I did not ostensibly decline his offer on that ground, though that was the true one.— What shall I do! Suffer him to think meanly of my motives; and give up all my plans too of living a distinguished single woman, in a house of my own,—the patroness of arts, the encourager of genius, the loadstar in society!—You know all this, my dear child,—you know what the wishes of my heart have been.

[Page 389]
EMMA. Indeed I knew that you spoke about it, but I did not know that you wished for it.
LATITIA. Ah! but I did—I thought I did. (Pacing backward and forward in an irresolute way; then stopping short.) And now, when this house, this most desirable house, may be had upon my own terms!
EMMA. But you forget, my dear aunt, that it wants a closet for your curiosities, and that the back staircase is so miserably narrow.
LATITIA. Don't distract me, Emma: tell me what to do. How does it strike you? Would it not be better—O, no! that won't do, neither.—O [100]   that Lady Totterdown or Mrs. Siftall were here, that I might ask their advice!—What would you advise me to do?
EMMA. The writer of that letter is not unreasonable enough to require an immediate answer: lay it aside for the present, and open the next. (Pointing to another letter.)
LATITIA (opening it). I am glad she has found time to answer me at
[Page 390]
last. You must listen to this, Emma; it regards the education of Lawry. Mrs. Overall is a woman of a deeply philosophical mind; and on such an important subject, I was anxious that she should give me her opinion.
EMMA. The thing of all others she is most ready to give. And what is it?
LATITIA (reading). “I have been prevented by many avocations from writing”—I sha'n't read the apology, but pass on to the matter in question:—“Education of every kind has, till lately, proceeded upon a wrong principle. Every body taught the same things, without regard to talent or capacity. Should not a boy's instruction be adapted to his genius?”—She is very right there, Emma; you need not smile. There is good reason in what she says.—“If he has a turn for mathematics, would you make him a lawyer? If [125]   forensic eloquence, would you cram him with grammar and Greek? If for poetry, would you confine him to a counting-house? If for painting, would you entangle him in diplomacy? Apply all the force of tuition to his principal,— his leading talent, and you will make a distinguished man of him with little trouble.”
EMMA (laughing heartily). And how shall we discover poor Lawry's
[Page 391]
talent, if playfulness and mischief be not ranked as natural endowments? Pray forgive me, aunt: I am too flippant.
LATITIA. Indeed, I think you are, child: listen to what follows:—“And how fortunate it is for your purpose that Dr. Crany, one of our most celebrated phrenologists, is in [.....] at present. Let him examine your nephew's head, and he will tell you at once what course to pursue.” Enter Brightly. Mr. Brightly, I refer to you.
BRIGHTLY. And what is the matter in question?
LATITIA. To educate my nephew according to the bent of his genius. Is not that right?
BRIGHTLY. Assuredly, when you can find it out.
LATITIA. Dr. Crany, the phrenologist, will do that for us.
BRIGHTLY. Very willingly, I doubt not. I forgot what new lights philosophy throws on such mysteries [150]   now-a-days. Yes, by all means let the boy's
[Page 392]
head be examined. Does this little girl make a jest of it?—Yes, yes, let him be examined, and then you will be no longer undecided on the treatment of your little will o' the wisp?
EMMA. To be sure that would be something gained.
BRIGHTLY. Let us try for it, at least; I'll go to the doctor forthwith.
LATITIA (running after him as he is going out). O no, no! not yet: you are too sudden, too hasty, Mr. Brightly. I must have more time to consider of it.
BRIGHTLY. And let the doctor proceed on his tour, and repent when the opportunity is past.
LATITIA. Does he leave the place so soon?
BRIGHTLY. I have heard so: this will be your only opportunity.
LATITIA. Go, then, go!—O how hasty and teasing these opportunities are!

[Page 393]
EMMA. Indeed, my dear aunt, you generally make them so.
                                         [Exit Brightly. Enter a Servant. SERVANT. The carriage is waiting, Ma'am.
LATITIA. Let it wait. It comes before the time.
EMMA. Indeed, Ma'am, your coachman seldom makes that mistake. By my watch he is half an hour after it. (Looking at her watch.)
LATITIA. Come, come then!—Flounce! Flounce! [175]   (calling off the Stage), bring my shawl and bonnet.
                                         [Exeunt in a hurry. SCENE III. Court before Latitia's House. Enter Sir Cameron Kunliffe and Mrs. Flounce, speaking as they enter. SIR CAMERON. And Miss Vane is only gone out for a short airing?

[Page 394]
FLOUNCE. Yes, Sir Cameron; that is to say, if she keeps in the mind as when she set out. I never answers for more than that of any lady.
SIR CAMERON. To be sure, Mrs. Flounce, your prudence is commendable. And since she may probably return so soon, I shall take the liberty of waiting in the parlour.
FLOUNCE. O! not there, Sir, if you please: you had better wait in the harbour yonder; the smell of all them roses and honeysuckles will delight you.
SIR CAMERON. I thank you, Ma'am. I will, by your leave, go into the parlour, and smell the roses another time.
                                         [Exit into the house. FLOUNCE. Plague take him for a very moral of perversity! for he'll find Mr. Franklin in the parlour; and how many odd notions may come into his head the cunning one himself would not guess. For, dear me! he has a marvellous gift for making much out of nothing, as his valet at the hall tells me.—He's perversity personified; for if one wants him to turn to the right hand, for that very reason he turns to the left.
                                         [Exit.
[Page 395]
SCENE IV. The Parlour. Enter Sir Cameron, starting back as he enters. SIR CAMERON. Did I not see a man go hastily into that opposite door?—I am not the only person, I apprehend, who is waiting the return of the ladies. And my lady's maid too; she is no novice in her calling.—“O, Sir! had you not better wait in the harbour yonder, and smell to the roses?” Well, well, what is all this to me? I prefer her, I fear, with all her follies, to any other woman; but, thank God! I am still free: I have not committed myself. She is coming: I hear voices in the hall—her own voice.—Why should a voice sound so sweet which so often repeats silly things?
Enter Latitia. LATITIA. Good morning, Sir Cameron. It is very good in you to come so early to see us. How unexpected the pleasure of meeting you here!
SIR CAMERON. To show my bodily presence two miles from
[Page 396]
my own house is not surely very wonderful, though it may be unexpected. However, I will not mortify my vanity so far as to suppose it both unexpected and unwelcome.
LATITIA. How ridiculously grave you look! How should one know how far your house is from this town?
SIR CAMERON. [25]   I'll answer you that question, if you will tell me in return, how long this place is to have the honour of harbouring so charming a visiter.
LATITIA. How all the world seem leagued to embarrass one with direct queries! My plans are not yet settled, and I don't know how long I may stay. The lease of a house requires some consideration.
SIR CAMERON. And you will not stint it on that point, I know. But the lease of a house puts deeds, and bonds, and contracts of another kind into one's thoughts: I hope you will not dash any presumptuous hope which a poor bachelor like myself may have entertained, by owning a matrimonial plan in connection with the other.
LATITIA. A matrimonial plan! What has a single
[Page 397]
woman, who has entered into her thirty-second year, to do with matrimonial plans?
SIR CAMERON. When the spirit and bloom of five-and-twenty brighten a lady's countenance, I never think of her age.—Well then, matrimony has nothing to do with it?
LATITIA. No, nothing at all: my house, that is to say, if I do take the lease, will be a cheerful spinster's house, where literati will assemble, amateurs sit in council, curiosities be examined, poems read, [50]   and all the bon-mots of the town be repeated; if I can induce the learned and refined to honour with their society such a humble individual as myself.
SIR CAMERON. What delightful intercourse!—with not one word of scandal required to give it zest.
LATITIA. Not one word.
SIR CAMERON. And this charming arrangement is determined upon?
LATITIA. Absolutely.

[Page 398]
SIR CAMERON. And woe worth the selfish man who should seek to turn aside your mind from such a refined speculation! He would surely deserve condign punishment.
LATITIA. Nay, that were judging too uncharitably. He might give one an opportunity of proving the strength of one's resolution, without incurring severe censure.
SIR CAMERON. But what if he should prove the weakness of it: would he not then deserve to be called a very selfish fellow?
LATITIA. I will give hard names to nobody: and I must ask your opinion of another affair, if you will have the goodness to favour me with it.—What had I better do in regard to my little idle nephew? [75]   I should like to give him a good education; for, idle as he is, he is clever enough: and I should like to avoid all fallacious and useless modes of tuition. I have been advised to have his head examined by the famous phrenologist who is now in the place; will you do me the favour to be present?
SIR CAMERON. I shall have the honour to obey your summons whenever you please.

[Page 399]
LATITIA. Your friends, Brightly and Thornhill, have also promised to be present, and here they come, opportunely.
Enter Brightly and Thornhill. BRIGHTLY. Away with you, Kunliffe, if you would not be beset by half a dozen of ladies of ton, who have laid their heads together to oblige you to give them a fête-champêtre in your park. They know that you are here; and I have got the start of them only a few paces.
SIR CAMERON. Thank you! thank you! I hear their voices without; and I would not encounter the clamour of that beldame and her train for the best buck in my park.
Enter three Ladies, as he is about to escape. FIRST LADY. Ho, Sir Cameron! stop the fugitive. (Catching hold of his sleeve.) You shan't escape till you have heard my speech, as the delegate of all [100]   the fair ladies in [.....]. Your park, they bid me say, is fairy ground; and they request to be its happy fairies for one day, to dance in its glades, and—and, I forget the rest. O yes! I am enjoined to say—

[Page 400]
SIR CAMERON. Nay, my good Madam; sweet as the sound of your voice may be in my ears, I will trouble you to say no more; your request is granted.
SECOND LADY. O how delightfully ready!
FIRST LADY. The day and the hour, Sir Cameron?
SIR CAMERON. The day and the hour which this lady (pointing to Latitia ) will do me the favour to name.
FIRST LADY. No, no! this is but a subterfuge; you must name it yourself.
SIR CAMERON. Pardon me, ladies, pardon me! Miss Vane will fix the time. I am obliged to attend an appointment.—Good morning,—excuse me; good morning.
                                         [Hurries away and exit. THIRD LADY. He is laughing at us; I told you it would be so.
FIRST LADY. But we'll follow him: he must not escape so.
                                         [Exeunt Ladies.
[Page 401]
Manent Brightly and Thornhill. BRIGHTLY. It would require more courage than our friend possesses to keep his ground as a bachelor lord of the manor, near a watering place like this. But what think ye of our bet? There is a life [125]   and hilarity in his countenance which assures me your paddock will soon become the orchard-ground of a certain worthy neighbour of yours; I see it very clearly, with all its fruit trees in blossom.
THORNHILL. We are all sanguine enough where our own advantage is concerned: I see your beautiful Rembrandt as clearly on the walls of my library; and all the connoisseurs of the county peeping at it through their fingers. But let us follow the game.
                                         [Exeunt. [As the last characters disappear, Franklin is seen peeping out from the inner room, and then comes forward.] FRANKLIN. The coast is clear at last. O, if I could catch a glimpse of her now! And here she comes, most fortunately, as if she knew I was waiting for her.
[Page 402]
Enter Emma. Dear Emma! I have been secreted in that closet while Sir Cameron, and your aunt, and a crowd of other visiters have been here in succession, which appeared as if it never would end. Now the hurly burly is over, and I am rewarded for my patience.
EMMA. Ah, George! Why must I chide you for coming?
FRANKLIN. And do you chide me?
EMMA. I ought to do it; you know very well that I [150]   ought.
FRANKLIN. Yes, to come here is foolish: to listen to the sound of your voice; to catch a glimpse of your figure through the shrubs as you play with your brother in the garden; to follow your carriage with mine eyes, and feel its very track on the sand like a talisman or charm to the fancy, is all very foolish, but a folly that is incorrigible.

[Page 403]
EMMA. We must try, however: consider well that my fortune is very small.
FRANKLIN. I cannot consider this; but I ought to consider that my own is still smaller.
EMMA. And whatever I have, I shall divide with my brother; for he is a posthumous child, and has not one farthing of his own.
FRANKLIN. I should deserve to be a slave in the galleys, could I wish thee to be one jot less generous.
EMMA. With prospects so precarious and so distant, ought we to be often together, or to enter into any engagement?
FRANKLIN. As far as incessant application to my profession can make them less precarious, I will toil; —no, no, I may not call it toil; —the patriarch's servitude for her whom he loved was sweet to him, and seemed but a few days.

[Page 404]
EMMA. [175]   I dare not enter into engagements.
FRANKLIN. Thou shalt not; I will be engaged and thou shalt be free.
EMMA. That is impossible: we may both change; I cannot injure thee so far.
FRANKLIN. How injure me? I will be the happier all my life for having loved thee, if I could only once know that I had ever been dear to thee: I would not change such happiness to—to—
EMMA. To be made Chancellor of England.
Enter Sir Cameron behind, and observing them in earnest discourse, coughs loud several times to give them notice of his presence, without effect, and then comes forward. SIR CAMERON. How very easy it would be to play the eaves-dropper at this interesting moment, when things
[Page 405]
might be spoken not unwelcome to a curious ear.—Thou art a happy fellow to engage such unbroken attention from such an auditor.— You are both too grave to answer me. Yet I would have you to know, that I have been made a confidant in affairs of the heart, ere now.
EMMA (aside to Franklin ). Conceal nothing from Sir Cameron, but permit me to retire.
                                         [Exit. SIR CAMERON. She whispered in your ear as she went.
FRANKLIN. “Conceal nothing from Sir Cameron” were the words.”
SIR CAMERON. Gentle, confiding creature! and wilt thou [200]   obey her? thou wilt not. Thou wilt just tell me what is perfectly convenient, and no more.
FRANKLIN. Nay, nay, cousin; you wrong me. I will obey her thoroughly, and I sha'n't tire you with a long story neither.
SIR CAMERON. Well, then, you shall walk home with me, and tell it by the way.

[Page 406]
FRANKLIN. I have left my hat in the little room. I'll join you immediately.
                                         [Exit. SIR CAMERON (alone). Kind, simple, confiding creatures! He, too, so frank and open! I love them both: ay, and I will behave nobly to them.
Re-enter Franklin with his hat. FRANKLIN. I must first run to the post-office for a letter I expect to receive; but don't stop for me; I'll join you at the end of the street.
SIR CAMERON. You have no love correspondence in any other quarter, I hope.
FRANKLIN. How can your mind harbour such a thought?
SIR CAMERON. The mind of one who has lived long in the world is often forced to give harbour to many an unwelcome thought.
FRANKLIN. The letter I expect is from no fair lady, but from worthy Mr. Harding.

[Page 407]
SIR CAMERON. Ha! what have you to do with Mr. Harding?
FRANKLIN. I have had to do with him lately as a solicitor.
SIR CAMERON. [225]   And on some serious business, no doubt.
FRANKLIN. Serious enough for me;—the piecing up of all the rags and remnants of that poor garment, my patrimony, that my shoulders may not be entirely bare, till my own industry shall earn for me another covering.
                                         [Exit. SIR CAMERON (alone). Harding his solicitor! Ha, ha! I like not this. Can it be only concerning his own little remnants of property!—It may be so; I will not doubt his word.—I hate all unreasonable suspicion.—I shall hear his story, and I shall touch upon the subject of Harding afterwards. I shall watch his looks; and if he really know any thing of the flaw in that bungled deed, I shall find it out.
                                         [Exit.
[Page 408]
ACT II. SCENE I. —The Library in Sir Cameron Kunliffe's House. Enter Master Lawry and the Housekeeper, speaking as they enter. HOUSEKEEPER. And you are come so far from home, Master, to look at a picture-book—the book of ships, eh?
LAWRY. And is that very surprising?
HOUSEKEEPER. To be sure one need not be much surprised; for boys will wander for the very love of wandering; it is all one as though it made a part of their day's work.
LAWRY. Ay, so they will; and now give me the book, and turning over the leaves of it will make another part of my day's work.
HOUSEKEEPER. But are you sure, young Sir, that Sir Cameron gave you leave to look over them books?

[Page 409]
LAWRY. Why should I tell a lie about it?
HOUSEKEEPER. To be sure it would be letting the devil have too good a bargain.
LAWRY. Yes; lying for a small matter is great unthrift; yet I have heard of a woman, who called herself ten years younger than she was, to make her age a proper match to her rose-coloured top-knot. (Looking archly at her head-dress.)
HOUSEKEEPER. Say what you please, young master; but if Sir Cameron gave you leave to look at his books when he is absent, it is what he never allowed to any one before.
LAWRY. I did not say he gave me leave to look at [25]   them in his absence.
HOUSEKEEPER. And what if he should return suddenly, and find you turning over his books? that would make a fine rumpus, I trow.
LAWRY. Would he punish me?

[Page 410]
HOUSEKEEPER. No, Sir, it is me that would be punished; I should lose my place and be ruinated.
LAWRY. Nay, nay! don't be distressed, good Madam: I will take all the blame on myself, and say that I entered in spite of you.
HOUSEKEEPER. That excuse would not pass with him; he would discharge me all the same. Heaven knows what trouble I have to keep my situation here.
LAWRY. Then I'll go directly, and see the pictures another time: don't be so distressed, my good ma'am.
HOUSEKEEPER. Well, thou art a sweet creature after all, and I will run some risk to please thee. (Taking a book from the shelves and laying it on the table.)
LAWRY. O thank you, thank you; how good you are. (Begins to turn over the leaves.) What a gallant ship, with her sails set and her colours flying! I wish I were aboard of her.
HOUSEKEEPER. Stop, stop; as I'm a Christian woman, your fingers are all smeared with lollypops.

[Page 411]
LAWRY. [50]   Then you are no Christian woman, for that is the stain of black cherries, and my hands have been washed since I ate them.
HOUSEKEEPER. Let us make sure of it, however. (Takes a handkerchief from her pocket and rubs one of his hands, while with the other he attempts to pull the smart bow from her cap.) Mischief to the very core of thee! Yet thou art a sweet creature too; and much pleasure may you have with your book.
                                         [Exit by an opposite door.                                          [While Lawry is busy with his book, Sir Cameron's voice is heard without, and he starts from the table, puts the book in its place, and looks round in dismay.] LAWRY. Where can I hide myself?—Ay, that will do. (Climbs upon the back of a library chair which stands close to a bookcase, and pulls down a map from its roller to conceal himself.)
Enter Sir Cameron. SIR CAMERON. The air of this day is oppressive; I feel drowsy and tired. (Sits down in the chair.) This seat is uneasy, the upholsterer has stuffed it very badly. Let me see. (Pulls it out from the book-case, and Lawry drops down on the floor.) —
[Page 412]
What have we here!—Hiding in my library! —It is Lawry, by my faith.—Get up, child: I hope thou art not hurt. He does not move! torpid as a dormouse!—Ho, there! is nobody at hand? Ho there! (Rings a bell violently.) No limbs are broken, I hope.
Enter Servants, and re-enter Housekeeper, all gathering about Lawry. HOUSEKEEPER. A boy in this room, preserve me! how got he here?—Ay, them urchins will scramble and climb, and make their way anywhere like very polecats. He got no entrance here, I'm sure, by the door in a natural way. Dear me, dear me!
SIR CAMERON. [75]   Don't make such a clamour about it: who cares how he entered. Examine whether he be hurt, and I'll despatch a man directly for a surgeon. He must be blooded.
                                         [Exit hastily. LAWRY (starting up from the floor). He will be a clever surgeon that finds me here.
                                         [Exit running. OMNES. Let him go, he's a clever imp,—don't hinder him.

[Page 413]
Re-enter Sir Cameron. SIR CAMERON. Where is he? have you carried him to bed.
FIRST SERVANT. His own legs have carried him off very nimbly.
SIR CAMERON. Pursue him, and fetch him back.
HOUSEKEEPER. It will be to no purpose, Sir Cameron; and the sooner he gets to his own home the better, for the ladies will be alarmed at his absence.
FIRST SERVANT (looking out). He has cleared the lawn already; catch him who can.
SIR CAMERON. Leave me.
                                         [Exeunt Servants, all but the Housekeeper. HOUSEKEEPER. I fear you will be thinking, Sir, that I let him in.
SIR CAMERON. Leave me, Mrs. Marmalade.
HOUSEKEEPER. I just want for to say, Sir Cameron—

[Page 414]
SIR CAMERON. I just want for to be alone.                                          [Exit Housekeeper, tossing her head. That boy has come to the house in my absence for some purpose or other.—Their purpose cannot be good who employ such means to effect [100]   it. (Looking up to the bookcase.) Concealed behind that map, which he must have unrolled to cover him. Ha! to scramble up to that very shelf where the key of my iron box is concealed behind the pamphlets.—By my faith, and they have been disturbed too. Let me see. (Standing on the seat of the chair, to examine the upper shelf.) The key is gone; devil take the cunning little varlet! he has stolen the key. (Pacing about in a disturbed manner.) I was surprised to hear that he had transactions with Harding. —I see the whole business now. He knows of the cursed mistake in that testamentary deed.— A base device to get it into his hands for inspection. (Advances to the front, and stands thoughtfully with his arms across.) Suspicious! had I not been less suspicious than most people, I should have been aware of it before.—O that there were less cause for suspicion in this vile world! Must we pass through it like infants or simpletons to be happy? what is reason given us for but to be a defence and a guard?—It may, indeed, occasionally deceive us. It may, —it may! that, alas, I know too well.—Oh!
[Page 415]
my remembrance of that cruel hour is intolerable. Had I then been as a simple infant instead [125]   of a reasoning man, how happy I might have been! (Beating his forehead.) Well, well, well! there is no use in thinking of it now. She is happy with another, and prosperous and happy may she be! Enter Humphries. What dost thou want? Did I ring the bell?
HUMPHRIES. No, your honour; but a servant from Miss Vane is here, and his lady requests you will remember your promise to be present at the examination of Master Lawry's head, and the cranium doctor is to be at her house at four o'clock precisely.
SIR CAMERON. My best respects to the lady, and I shall have the honour of obeying her summons.                                          [Exit Humphries. If the organs of mischief and knavery be not discovered under the curly locks of that little imp, the science, as they deem it, of phrenology is a spider's web to catch flies withal.
                                         [Exit.
[Page 416]
SCENE II. An Ante-room. Enter Humphries and a Locksmith, carrying a basket with his tools. HUMPHRIES. You may set down your things here a bit, Mr. Cramp, till Sir Cameron rings his bell.— Plague upon it! to make all this ado about nothing. Plague take the whole tribe of suspectors and inspectors, with all their cautions, and securities, and contrivances!
LOCKSMITH. No, no, Mr. Grumbler! you must not say so to a locksmith. My benison upon the whole tribe.
HUMPHRIES. Yes, truly, thou hast made a pretty penny of it here.
LOCKSMITH. Not much neither: I have not changed a lock in this house these three months.

[Page 417]
HUMPHRIES. Hast thou forgot the two inner presses in his study, and the escrutoire in his dressing-room?
LOCKSMITH. No, but I hope I shall soon; for one job beats another from my mind.
HUMPHRIES. Ay, thou thinkest but of one thing at a time. I wish my master would do the same; for he is not one jot wiser for mixing up so many notions together, like cloaks hung upon a hall-pin, black, blue, and dirty, every one huddled over another: that he is not, I'm sure.
LOCKSMITH. I wonder such a plain, surly fellow as thou [25]   art should keep thy place in his service so long.
HUMPHRIES. He takes my surliness for honesty.
LOCKSMITH. And he is not one jot wiser for that, I should reckon.
HUMPHRIES. No, Cramp; he is not deceived. But as I am honest, I must be treated like an honest man.
LOCKSMITH. Certainly; that is but reasonable. And how
[Page 418]
does Mrs. Marmalade contrive to stay here so long? She is neither plain nor surly, I'm sure.
HUMPHRIES. Oh! but she has one great advantage over me.
LOCKSMITH. What is that?
HUMPHRIES. He sees she is a fool; and certes, she is the greatest fool that ever had wit enough to keep account of household linen, and overlook the making of pickles and preserves.
LOCKSMITH. Yes, for certain, she has a great power of words on every occasion, and few of them to the purpose. How has he patience to hear her?
HUMPHRIES. I'll tell you how: whenever he questions her about any mischance in the family, he knows very well that all she tells him, in the first place, is false, but that it will soon be contradicted as she goes on; and that what she tells him last will be within a trifle of the truth. Besides, he is amused with her, and she is related to his old [50]   nurse. For he is really a kind-hearted man, for all his odd notions and vagaries.

[Page 419]
LOCKSMITH. He is too wise, belike, to think there be any honest folk in the world.
HUMPHRIES. No, no! he thinks there may be a tithe of honest folk in it, but how to find them out,— that is his perplexity. (Bell rings.) Now, he is ready for you: follow me with your tools, and do what you can for this cursed chest, else there will be no peace in the house for a week.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE III. An Apartment in the House of Latitia. Enter Emma and Dr. Crany, by opposite sides. DR. CRANY. Is it your summons, Madam, I have the honour of obeying?
EMMA. It is my aunt, Sir, who requested this favour of you, and she will be here immediately. Have the goodness to be seated.
DR. CRANY. I prefer the position which allows me most
[Page 420]
perfectly to contemplate the riches of that beautiful forehead. (Advancing towards her, while she retreats.) Music—the music of the soul. Colours—design—comprehensiveness! O! what a rich mine of charming capacity! Pray, permit— (putting out his hand to raise the hair from her forehead, as she has got to the wall, and can retreat no farther.)
EMMA (preventing him). Have the goodness, Sir, to stand farther off: it is not my head that my aunt wishes you to examine.
Enter Latitia, followed by Brightly and Thornhill. LATITIA. I am infinitely obliged to you, Doctor; but pray take no trouble with the head of this young lady, for her education is finished.
DR. CRANY. Is education ever finished, my good Madam, while one capacity remains unexplored and uncultivated? Our science is still in its infancy, and therefore the world is still in its infancy; talents wasted—time wasted—tuition wasted —reason wasted.

[Page 421]
BRIGHTLY (aside). [25]   Ay, there will be a great saving of reason when it comes into use.
THORNHILL. It is a supposed science, Sir, in which yourself and some other distinguished philosophers place much confidence.
DR. CRANY. A supposed science, Sir! it is a proved one. Proved by a successive inspection of the skulls of distinguished men, from remote antiquity down to the present day.
THORNHILL. And how have you procured them?
DR. CRANY. We have procured them, Sir, with much labour and very great expense.
BRIGHTLY. You are very liberal, I dare say, to any person who puts you in possession of a skull that confirms the rules of your science.
DR. CRANY. Certainly, Sir; his reward is great, and deservedly so.
THORNHILL. Yes, Doctor, permission to open the coffins of
[Page 422]
the celebrated dead could not be easily obtained; the reward must be in proportion.
BRIGHTLY. And to him who should put you in possession of a skull apparently adverse to your science, what would be his remuneration?
DR. CRANY. The same, Sir; when we are assured of the skull being genuine, we make no difference. [50]   But—which proves the truth of the science— we have very, very seldom indeed, such a skull offered to us.
BRIGHTLY. An indubitable proof, indeed, Dr. Crany; I beg your pardon for having insinuated the slightest doubt. And, as you say, what a saving of time and of reason there will be, when, instead of inquiring the past actions and propensities of a man, you have only to run over his head with your fingers, and become acquainted with his character at once.
DR. CRANY. Exactly so; and with the ladies' permission I will tell an anecdote to illustrate the fact.
LATITIA. Pray do, Doctor; we are all fond of anecdotes.

[Page 423]
DR. CRANY. A man was tried for murder at the Bury assizes; the evidence was deficient, and the jury retired to deliberate. But a clever phrenologist, having crept to the bar and peeped at the prisoner's head, whose hair happened to be cut very close, descried the organs of destruction of such an appalling size as left no hesitation on the subject, and he could scarcely repress an exclamation, when the door of the jury-box opened, and the foreman pronounced the prisoner not guilty.
THORNHILL. [75]   They decided according to the evidence.
DR. CRANY. Yes, Sir; and till the laws of evidence are reformed, they cannot do otherwise. ( Latitia whispers to Emma, who retires.) But my story is not yet finished. Six months afterwards the prisoner committed another murder, for which he was convicted and hanged. Now, had he been hanged for the first offence, he could not have committed the second.
BRIGHTLY. He must be very contentious, indeed, Doctor, who does not admit that.
                                         [Re-enter Emma, lugging in Lawry, and followed by Sir Cameron. ]
[Page 424]
EMMA. Come, come, Lawry, make no more wry faces, but kneel down here, and let that gentleman examine your head.
LAWRY. My head! he will not flog that end of me.
                                         [The Doctor sits down, and Lawry kneels.] DR. CRANY (feeling his head). The organs of excursiveness: this young gentleman plays truant pretty often.
LATITIA. O, what a true discovery! he 's always running about. Proceed, proceed, if you please.
DR. CRANY. There is great paucity here in the organs of attention, and those of application seem to be wanting entirely.
LATITIA. O dear! how true it is! Your art discovers his nature at once. Pray proceed; something else may be discovered that will teach us how [100]   to manage him.
SIR CAMERON. Keep him at home without his dinner till he has learnt his lesson, and he will do well enough.

[Page 425]
LATITIA. Nay, you are rather too harsh, Sir Cameron.
EMMA. But see, the Doctor has discovered something better now, for his whole countenance is enlightened.
DR. CRANY. Rejoice, rejoice with me, ladies! the greatest philosopher in England is at my feet.
OMNES. What is it! What is it?
DR. CRANY. The organs of mathematics, superb, surprising, superlative. (Starting from his seat and skipping about in ecstasy). Such an organ never yet rose proudly under the pressure of this thumb. Have you not frequently seen him tracing figures on a slate—circles, triangles, and such like?
EMMA. Often enough, Doctor; but the figure he commonly traces is more like a rickety boat with a flag to it than a triangle.
LATITIA. Kneel again, Lawry; the Doctor may discover something more.
DR. CRANY. No, I have done; I know him perfectly now.
[Page 426]
Keep him at home, and get a mathematical tutor for him immediately.
SIR CAMERON. Yes, Doctor, excellent advice: keep the runagate at home, and keep him close to his figures [125]   and his books.
LAWRY (crying). Keep me to my books! I'll run off with the first band of gypsies that lights a fire on the common. What is all that examining for? You might have known very well that if I would stick to my books I should read, without all this pother.
DR. CRANY. But you shall have books so suited to your nature, my boy, that you will delight to stay at home and read them.
LAWRY. Wait till you find such books then; and I'll stay at home when I like it.
                                         [Exit, whimpering and muttering. DR. CRANY. Shall I have the honour to examine the other heads in this good company. (To Latitia, in a very ingratiating tone). Madam,I know that all I shall discover here (pointing to her head) must be amiable.

[Page 427]
LATITIA. Excuse me, Doctor, I have not courage.
DR. CRANY (turning to Sir Cameron ). There is no lack of courage here, I presume. Allow me, Sir, to have the honour. What a promising forehead! those brows, and that fine spreading of the bone!
LATITIA. Do, Sir Cameron; pray be examined; you will oblige me so much.
DR. CRANY (aside). O! it is Sir Cameron Kunliffe, I find.
BRIGHTLY AND THORNHILL (speaking at the same time.) Do, Kunliffe; you cannot refuse a lady's request.
LATITIA (placing a chair). [150]   Sit down here, and the Doctor will bend over you.
SIR CAMERON (sitting down). If it must be so, I must ev'n submit.
DR. CRANY (as he examines his head). Contemplative—very contemplative; likes books better than hunting.
LATITIA. How true!

[Page 428]
BRIGHTLY. Bravo, Doctor!
THORNHILL. No wizard could have guessed better.
DR. CRANY. And here are organs that have been well developed; the—the—
SIR CAMERON. Don't hesitate, Doctor;name it, I beg.
DR. CRANY. The organ of inspection.
BRIGHTLY. Bravo again, Doctor! you have a very good name for it; and if there be such a thing as the organ of suspicion, whereabout does it lie? for I should think the two are pretty near neighbours.
DR. CRANY. They are; but except when much developed, we do not call the last by that name; we call it suspectiveness.
BRIGHTLY. Ha, ha, ha! what nice distinctions! And, I suppose, the organ of deceptiveness does not lie far off from either.

[Page 429]
DR. CRANY. Excuse me, Sir, as an active quality it stands far apart; if you mean by it a passive one, we have nothing to do with it.
THORNHILL. [175]   Doctor, you have answered him well.
SIR CAMERON. But, my good friends, I must have the organ of patience, also, if I am to sit here till you have asked all your fanciful questions. Don't mind them, Dr. Crany, but go on your own way.
                                         [ Dr. Crany, after looking at the back of his head, shrinks from it, and covers his eyes with his hand.] LATITIA. What is the matter, Doctor? Good heavens! what is the matter?
DR. CRANY. Don't inquire, Madam; in the prosecution of our science, we are subject to painful revulsions. May I beg a glass of water?
THORNHILL (having brought him a glass of water, which he drinks in a languid, affected manner). I hope you are better now, and will proceed with what is so very interesting.

[Page 430]
DR. CRANY. Excuse me, ladies and gentlemen, I examine no more to-day.
SIR CAMERON (rising quickly). We had better take our leave, and your heads (to Brightly and Thornhill ) may wait for some future occasion. (Bows to the Ladies, and speaks aside to Brightly and Thornhill, as he goes off.) It is only a feint to get rid of your questions.
                                         [Exit, followed by Brightly and Thornhill. LATITIA. Good heavens! Dr. Crany, do not keep me in this agony: what have you discovered on the head of Sir Cameron?
DR. CRANY. Do not inquire, Madam, unless you have some very particular reason for it.—He is not a man to be exasperated.—He is not a man to be [200]   trifled with.—He is not a man to be conciliated.
LATITIA. Is he so dangerous?
DR. CRANY (looking about). Is there no one near us to listen?

[Page 431]
LATITIA. No one; tell us, for heaven's sake: is he mad? is he dangerous?
DR. CRANY. It is fearful to think what he is. He has the organ of destruction on his head so strong.— Oh! half a dozen bloody murders would not exhaust that fearful capacity of mischief. I fear I distress you, ladies, but my duty compels me to it. Be secret, be secret. I dare not remain here; I will go to my lodgings and try to recover from this very sudden shock.
                                         [Exit. LATITIA. Dear Emma, what do you think of this? it is terrible.
EMMA. If it be true.
LATITIA. Do you doubt it? You saw how unwilling he was to speak, and the distress he was in.
EMMA. If the distress was real, he will fly from the vicinity of a man so dangerous.
LATITIA. Yes, we may judge by that; let us be secret, and see the result. I must retire to my chamber; give me your arm.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 432]
SCENE IV. A Garden. Enter Sir Cameron Kunliffe, and walks backward and forward for some time, muttering, before he speaks audibly. SIR CAMERON. It will not do; they must try some other device before they get this into their custody. To make me their confidant with such seeming simple honesty, and attempt such a trick after all! I shall be less easily deceived another time.
Enter Franklin. FRANKLIN. Walking quarter-deck in this gloomy nook! I have been seeking you every where, all over the grounds.
SIR CAMERON. And having found me, Sir, what is your pleasure with me?
FRANKLIN. How is this, Sir Cameron? You seem offended with me.

[Page 433]
SIR CAMERON. Why do you suppose that I am offended?
FRANKLIN. Your looks tell me so; I would gladly interpret them otherwise.
SIR CAMERON. And you have learned to watch and interpret looks, it seems: you are too young a man for this.
FRANKLIN. Why, a dog or an infant will do as much.
SIR CAMERON. Fidelity and affection may do any thing.
FRANKLIN. If I am destitute of those qualities, I have harboured too long under your roof. (A sullen pause on the part of Sir Cameron. ) Farewell, [25]   cousin: I shall visit Miss Vane and her niece once more, and then return to town.
SIR CAMERON (calling after him as he is going off). Hark ye, cousin! you will see Mr. Harding, no doubt, when you are in town; pray give my respects to him—my very profound respects.                                          [Exit Franklin. O, that he had remained as I once knew him! I should have loved him, I should have taken him to my heart.—Vain wish! the world is a school
[Page 434]
of perversion. (Walks to and fro again, and then stops.) Money, thou art truly styled the root of all evil. I should soon, of my own accord, have declared the blunder of that stupid attorney, and should have behaved liberally and nobly. But now, what can I do? It were silliness —it were cowardice to concede. No; I will carry the suit through every court in England first, and live on a crust after all, if lawyers will leave me as much.
Enter Thornhill. THORNHILL. You intended to ride this morning, but I am sorry I cannot accompany you. I have made an engagement with Miss Vane to try the newly discovered organ of her nephew, and will give him his first lesson of mathematics forthwith.
SIR CAMERON. Ha! put by his aunt under your tuition?
THORNHILL. Why should this surprise you? it is only an [50]   experiment.
SIR CAMERON. True, true; we are all, now-a-days, busy with experiments: we shall find out, by and by, some new way of giving brains to a dunce, dexterity to awkwardness, boldness to timidity, ay, and stability to the wavering of a fair lady's will. Faith
[Page 435]
and truth! governing and law-making will only be matters of experiment. Make verses on the subject, man, and publish them; that will be another experiment.
THORNHILL. Nay, how far rhyme without reason will succeed, is no new experiment.
SIR CAMERON. But there will be reason in it, if thou dost not mar it with thy rhyme.
Enter Brightly. THORNHILL. Welcome, Brightly; you will help me to deal with this moody man here. Have you any news to tell that may amuse us?
BRIGHTLY. To be sure I have. The learned phrenologist has suddenly disappeared from his lodgings; and Miss Vane and her niece are preparing to set off for town.
SIR CAMERON. Who told you this? It cannot be true: the last part of the story cannot be true.
BRIGHTLY. Yet that is just the part of it that I am most
[Page 436]
assured of; for they are preparing the imperial [75]   of her carriage, and horses have been ordered from the inn. If you would have her remain, Kunliffe, you had better go speedily to wish her good-bye.
SIR CAMERON. Wish her to the devil!
BRIGHTLY. Wishes are free to every one; but even that wish may be expressed in a civil manner. —Come away with me, Thornhill: the moody man will deal best with himself; and I have some curiosity to see that urchin get his lesson of lines and triangles beore they go; for many half hours and half minds may pass away ere his fair aunt is actually in her carriage.
                                         [Exeunt Brightly and Thornhill. SIR CAMERON (alone). Preparing to depart!—No notice given!— The phrenologist too disappeared! Yes, yes; there is some compact in all this.—His sudden illness too, and all those affected grimaces.— Can he have persuaded her, that some terrible propensities are revealed on the surface of my pericranium; and can she be such a fool as to believe him?—Ay, ay; a rich heiress has fallen into the hands of a cunning knave by a weaker device ere now.—I must not linger here: I'll
[Page 437]
get to the bottom of this villainy before I rest.— O, this world of knaves and fools! why was my [100]   lot cast in it?—But, being so cast, shall I become quietly the prey of cunning and deceit? May I not use similar weapons in self-defence?— No, no! let her go: fortune was not my object; and if she is fool enough to believe him, she is worthy of such a mate.—Yet it makes me distracted. Oh, this perversity of mind! She is fickle, she is foolish, she is fanciful, she is capricious, and her very faults endear her to my unaccountable feelings.—He shall not have her.—His filthy fingers sprawling over my head for such a villainous purpose: it is abominable. —If deceit will not serve me, force shall. Enter Housekeeper, with a bundle in her hand. What brings you here, Marmalade?
HOUSEKEEPER. La, Sir! nothing bad, I'm sure. If she waits at the back garden gate, it is for no bad purpose, I'm sure.
SIR CAMERON. Who waits there? Tell me plainly, and in few words.
HOUSEKEEPER. Lord a' mercy! why should I make many words about it? She has done it very badly,
[Page 438]
and I don't care who knows what a miserable mantua-maker she is.
SIR CAMERON. Mantua-maker! What does all this nonsense mean?
HOUSEKEEPER. [125]   It is nonsense, for sartain; and I says to her, says I, “What does it signify making the gown too long, only for to save the cutting of the stuff, when I cannot take one step before me, without trampling it in the dirt?”
SIR CAMERON. Is the gown here?
HOUSEKEEPER. Yes, Sir Cameron; and she is waiting at the back gate to take it to be altered.
SIR CAMERON. Ha! let me see it.
HOUSEKEEPER (taking a gown from the bundle). I hope you like the colour, Sir: it is gay, but genteel. I never buys nothing that is vulgar.
SIR CAMERON. Why should you, Marmalade? People only buy what they want.—And it is too long for you?

[Page 439]
HOUSEKEEPER (shaking it out). A mort too long. The giantess that beats the drum at Middleton fair might wear it and be fitted.
SIR CAMERON. Give it to me.
HOUSEKEEPER. To you, Sir Cameron!
SIR CAMERON. Ask no questions. The gown is mine: carry it back to your own room, and I'll follow you immediately. [Exit Housekeeper.] Yes, this will do; she will provide me with shawl and bonnet besides, and I'll be a match for this cursed philosopher.
                                         [Exit. SCENE V. A Parlour in the House of Latitia, and the Glass Door of a small Conservatory seen at one side, with a Curtain drawn behind it. Enter Flounce, who goes to the door, which she opens in silence, giving a key to somebody in the inside. FLOUNCE (alone). It was well I found the coast clear, and have
[Page 440]
given him the key: he may now keep concealed, or come out as he pleases.
Enter Latitia. LATITIA. What wert thou doing in the conservatory? Hast thou left any odd matters there?—But I have changed my mind again, and sha'n't set off till the evening; so you need not be in a hurry.
FLOUNCE. I never am, Ma'am; for the more I hurry myself to obey your directions, the surer it always proves to be of no use.
LATITIA. Thou art rather sharp, methinks: something has ruffled thee. What strange awkward rantipole was that I saw thee speaking to a few minutes since in the lane?
FLOUNCE. She did not tell me her name, Ma'am; and I had too little curiosity to ask it. I never speaks when there is no reason for it.
LATITIA. A good rule, Flounce, which thou observest, with some exceptions. (Looking off the Stage.) But look yonder,—a man coming in a strange
[Page 441]
stealing manner along the passage: what brings him here?
FLOUNCE (turning round and looking). No good, I'm sure; for it is Doctor Crany: I know him by his legs.
Enter Dr. Crany, with his shoulders wrapt in a cloak, and holding his hat before his face. LATITIA. [25]   Is it possible, my good Sir? I thought you were ere now many miles hence,—that you considered your life as in danger.
DR. CRANY. I will account for my being here; but to your ears alone can I explain it.
LATITIA (after motioning to Flounce, who goes off). And now, Sir, if you please.
DR. CRANY. That I considered my life in danger is true. Ay, too truly in danger from the offence I must have given to a man with such destructive propensities.
LATITIA. And why did you venture nevertheless to remain?

[Page 442]
DR. CRANY. Ah, dearest Miss Vane! can you ask that question? do not my eyes—my fond languishing eyes answer it plainly, and tell you that I could not think of saving my own life when the safety of one whom I love far better than myself is concerned.
LATITIA. You astonish me.
DR. CRANY. Let me entreat you to remain no longer in the neighbourhood of such a dangerous person. I tremble to think of it.
LATITIA. What can I do?
DR. CRANY. Fly with me this very night. Fly with a man who loves, who adores you, whose whole life [50]   shall be devoted to your happiness. (Kneels at her feet.)
LATITIA (recoiling from him indignantly). Off, base deceiver! you have betrayed yourself; and thank Heaven you have! I see your purpose now: you have slandered a worthy gentleman for your own selfish ends.

[Page 443]
DR. CRANY. Slandered, Madam! do you believe that the organs of murder are not really on his head?
LATITIA. No, Sir; neither that nor any bad thing do I believe of him.
DR. CRANY. Have patience for a moment: I cannot suffer you to run upon your own destruction. I implore —I beseech you for your own safety! my chaise is at the gate: if the present opportunity is neglected— (Catching hold of her gown.)
LATITIA. Unhand me; let me go, or I will alarm the house, and bring some one to my assistance.
                                         [ Sir Cameron Kunliffe, bursting from the conservatory in woman's dress, shows himself, but hesitates to advance.] LATITIA. O come, come, good Madam, come nearer.
DR. CRANY (turning round and perceiving Sir Cameron ). Good Madam! and what is your pleasure here, good Madam?
SIR CAMERON (in a feigned voice). My pleasure is that you release that lady's hand from your unworthy hold: touch but the
[Page 444]
tip of her finger or the hem of her garment, if you dare; I will not permit the smallest breach of decorum in my presence.
DR. CRANY. You are a lady of an extreme delicacy, undoubtedly.
SIR CAMERON. [75]   Yes, Sir, of a delicacy which must not be offended.
DR. CRANY. I plainly perceive, Madam, that yours is entirely of that description. I have the honour to obey your commands. (Stepping backward and bowing low.)
SIR CAMERON (advancing on him with a deep, awkward curtsey). You are extremely polite, Sir; I have the honour to thank you for your ready obedience.
DR. CRANY (stepping farther back and bowing as before). My obedience to you, Madam, expresses my deference to the sex of whom you are the worthy representative.
SIR CAMERON (advancing as the other retreats, and curtseying again). Say rather, that part of the sex to whom
[Page 445]
gallants like yourself pay their readiest obedience.
DR. CRANY (still retreating). As you please, Madam, and I wish you good day.
SIR CAMERON. No, no, Sir, your company is too agreeable; I will not part with it so soon.
                                         (Taking hold of his collar, and dragging him back to the front of the Stage.) DR. CRANY. Devil take her! she has the grasp and the power of a moss-trooper.
Enter Brightly. BRIGHTLY. What uncouth sight is here; is there masquerading in the house?
LATITIA. Indeed, there is some appearance of it. This lady has come unexpectedly, and has done me unspeakable service; for which I know not how to thank her enough.
BRIGHTLY. But she steals away and avoids your acknowledgments.

[Page 446]
LATITIA. [100]   My good Madam, you will not leave me so soon.
SIR CAMERON. Permit me to go out to the open air; I am faint and languid.
BRIGHTLY. You had better put off your head-gear; that large bonnet, with so much hooding and muffling under it, would exclude the free air from your face, though you were on the top of Mount Ararat. Permit me to assist in removing it. ( Sir Cameron puts out his hand to prevent Brightly, and says something indistinctly.) You speak with such a soft, pretty voice, lady, that I don't know one word you say.
LATITIA (aside to Brightly ). She is observant of forms, and will not have a gentleman's assistance. (Aloud to Sir Cameron. ) Let me take off your bonnet, if I can reach it. ( Sir Cameron stoops, and she removes the bonnet.) And this handkerchief, too (takes off a handkerchief) , and a great cap besides. What's under all this!
SIR CAMERON (calling out in his own voice after Dr. Crany, who is about to steal away). Look to Dr. Crany there, don't let him steal off.

[Page 447]
OMNES. Sir Cameron,—Sir Cameron disguised!
BRIGHTLY (to Sir Cameron ). How had you patience to endure all these trammels?
SIR CAMERON. [125]   I have been too fortunate under them to feel impatient, but help me, an thou wilt, to get rid of them now. (Putting off his female attire, assisted by Brightly. ) But where is the doctor? don't let him steal off.
DR. CRANY (advancing). No, Sir; you need have no apprehension that I shall steal off, as you are pleased to term it. I am too bold in my conscious innocence, and in the principles of an incomparable science, to shrink from defending both. Have I not already given proofs of its truth and usefulness in the discovery I have made of the talents of that unmanageable boy?—who may now be cultivated, from a mere vacant idler, into one of the deepest philosophers of the age.
Enter Thornhill. BRIGHTLY. Here comes his tutor, very opportunely, to corroborate your assertions, Dr. Crany. (To
[Page 448]
Thornhill. ) And pray what report have you to make of the wonderful capacity of your pupil?
THORNHILL. I have little to say on that subject.
                                         [A book is thrown after him from without.] BRIGHTLY. And even that little need not be said. (Picking up the book.) This dishonoured Euclid tells the tale plainly enough.
Enter Lawry (chased by Flounce ). FLOUNCE. Come away to your room, Master Lawry: O fy, fy! I beg pardon, Madam, for coming after [150]   him, but he gets worser and worser than ever, since that heathenish book there was put into his hands.
DR. CRANY. I cannot suffer this defamation. Come here, young Sir, and I will show the organs of mathematics on your head of a most prominent and promising size. (To Flounce. ) Pray make him stand still one moment, if you please. ( Flounce takes hold of Lawry, while the Doctor parts his hair with his fingers, and shews a lump.) There, gentlemen, you see it with your own eyes; a more superb organ never met the sight or the touch of a phrenologist.

[Page 449]
FLOUNCE. Lord help you, doctor! that is the lump that came but the other day, after a blow from the bat-ball: two pennyworth of the oil of rosemary would send it away in no time at all.
DR. CRANY. Well, well; there is no contending with prejudice, and the sooner I take my leave the better;—if I am not to be considered as under constraint. (Bowing affectedly to Sir Cameron. )
SIR CAMERON. You have my good leave now, learned Sir, to go where you please.
BRIGHTLY (to Dr. Crany as he retires). But won't you wait for a guard of protection, good Doctor, being in the neighbourhood of so tremendous an enemy?
                                         [Exit Dr. Crany, bowing on either hand as he retires. LATITIA. [175]   Nay, Mr. Brightly, let him off peaceably with no more taunts: I believe he has great faith in his art, though he abuses it for his own base purposes. I thank you all: to you, Mr. Thornhill, I am greatly obliged. And what shall I do now with this unruly boy? Why was I left guardian to such a creature?

[Page 450]
LAWRY. Never trouble your head about me, aunt; I can handle a rope and climb to the mast-head, and look over a hundred leagues of ocean, and visit far-off shores, as well as any boy.
LATITIA (kissing him). My dear creature, my dear boy! that were a hard life for thee; thou art too good for this.
LAWRY. Not a whit, not a whit! Am I too good for what Lord Nelson has done before me?
                                         [Exit skipping and bounding lightly. LATITIA. And now, credulous dupe as I have been, will you pardon me, Sir Cameron?
BRIGHTLY (preventing Sir Cameron from speaking). Allow me to answer for you, Kunliffe, or you will mar your present advantage. (To Miss Vane. ) You cannot surely expect, my dear lady, to be let off with impunity. Say your own self what amends he ought to have: pronounce your own punishment, and it shall be immediately inflicted.
LATITIA. How provoking you are, Mr. Brightly! how
[Page 451]
[200]   can I pronounce or think of any thing immediately? Do you determine it.
BRIGHTLY. You give me leave to do so, on the spot, then?
LATITIA. O no, no! not immediately.
BRIGHTLY. I beg pardon, Madam, immediately is a position you dislike: I shall take time to consider; and, at your tea-table, in the evening, it shall be pronounced.
SIR CAMERON. Round which, I presume, we are all invited to assemble.
LATITIA. Most assuredly; I request all present to do me that honour. Excuse me now; I must retire: the thoughts of my own folly make me quite bewildered and unwell.
                                         [Exit. BRIGHTLY. She must have a bad time of it, I think, if she sicken on every new proof of her folly. (Half aside to Thornhill ).
SIR CAMERON (overhearing and turning to him sharply). The caustic of thy tongue is intolerable: her
[Page 452]
worst fault is indecision; and if she were wiser than she is, who would like her the better for it?
BRIGHTLY. Not you, I can plainly perceive. (Aside to Thornhill, as Sir Cameron hurries off). Those words augur well, methinks, for my paddock.
THORNHILL. Don't bespeak your fruit trees, however, till you have won it. But let us follow him and learn all that happened while he was under that [225]   absurd metamorphosis.
BRIGHTLY. Ay, let us do so; I have a great curiosity to know every thing about it. Who would have thought of his dignity compromised under a mantua and petticoat?
                                         [Exeunt after Sir Cameron.
[Page 453]
ACT III. SCENE I. —A small Parlour in the House of Latitia; enter Emma, and walks about thoughtfully; presently enter Franklin by another door. FRANKLIN. How fortunate I am to find you here!
EMMA. How so? you seem agitated.
FRANKLIN. I have been sculking about the premises for a chance of your coming into the garden, that I might see you before I set off.
EMMA. Set off! where are you going?
FRANKLIN. Anywhere, for I cannot stay longer here.
EMMA. What is the matter? Cannot stay?
FRANKLIN. I cannot stay a moment longer in Sir Cameron's house, and I don't like to go to another,
[Page 454]
which might give him pain. He has got a strange crotchet into his head about some key or other, and I don't know what besides, and he has spoken to me very unkindly.
EMMA. I am sorry for it. But it will soon pass away. Those who are naturally suspicious are often unkind, and repent it afterwards.
FRANKLIN. And why should I linger here, only to strengthen what is but too strong already—an adversary, which for your sake, dearest Emma, as well as my own, ought to be kept in check. Blessings on you, my sweet and generous friend! Only say that I may again visit you when you come to town with your aunt, and I will take [25]   my leave as cheerly as I may.
EMMA. Surely you won't go now, when we are all assembling round my aunt's tea-table, on matters of great importance, and you are one of the invited, you know. Be as testy with Sir Cameron as you please, but surely she deserves more courtesy at your hands.
FRANKLIN. And shall have it too, if it be a courtesy which she will be pleased with, and her little niece does not forbid. I think I hear them assembling;
[Page 455]
they are merry without.—Poh, poh! I care not a fig for Sir Cameron.
EMMA. You will join us by and by; I must go now to be useful.
FRANKLIN. And I'll be useful too. I'll pour out the tea for you, Emma. That little delicate hand has not strength enough to lift a heavy teapot over all the circle of cups and saucers that wait for the fragrant stream from its bountiful spout. Care for Sir Cameron! No; I care for nobody now.
EMMA. You will join us by and by, then?
FRANKLIN. Nay, I will go with you now, and lead you in boldly before them all. (Offering his arm.)
EMMA. You are bold, of a sudden.
FRANKLIN. [50]   I am bold or timid at any time, as the influence of my little governess inspires.
                                         [Exeunt, and as they go off, Flounce enters by the opposite side with a great nosegay of flowers in her hand, and stands gazing after them, before she speaks.]
[Page 456]
FLOUNCE. Ay, poor young things! you must have patience: matrimony is a very pretty thing, but it will not knock at your door at this bout.
Enter Butler, stealing behind her. BUTLER. And at whose door will it knock at this bout?
FLOUNCE. What is that to you, Mr. Long-ears; you may guess.
BUTLER. One, mayhap, at whose door it will not have to wait: ready entrance to the long expected may be depended upon.
FLOUNCE. Long expected?
BUTLER. Yes; and how long, Mrs. Flounce? Some ten or fifteen years, or thereabouts?
FLOUNCE. Say fifteen, an you will; what is that to my mistress?
BUTLER. O, it is your mistress you are thinking of.

[Page 457]
FLOUNCE. And who was it you were thinking of, I should be glad to know?
BUTLER. Not so very glad, neither, were I to answer “of the mistress's maid.”—Well, well; don't look so grave. It is your mistress's door, then, that matrimony is now knocking at; but why should you be so pert upon it?
FLOUNCE. I am forgetting my flowers.
BUTLER. [75]   I'll arrange them for you, and carry them to the drawing-room presently. In the mean time, tell me why you are so pert upon this marriage; it won't mend the profits of your place. (Taking the nosegay from her, and arranging them in a pot on a side-table while she speaks.)
FLOUNCE. No; but it may prevent my profits from being reduced. If she would remain as she is, with her lovers, and her confidants, and her flatterers, and her concerts, and her parties, and all proper suitable things that a rich lady ought to have, I should ask no better; but if she takes it into her head that a lady of thirty should give up gay dressing, and apply to her learning, and become a book-fancier, and a blue-stocking virtuoso,
[Page 458]
what's to become of my perquisites? It would make your hair stand on end, to hear all the nonsense I have heard about them there books.
BUTLER. My hair makes no stirring at all when nonsense is spoken. It would have a restless time of it else in this family; so pray tell me.
FLOUNCE. And, will you believe it—whole shelves filled with great vollums; and some of them—fiend take them!—with as much silk, gold, and vellum on their backs as would buy a gentlewoman a good gown.
BUTLER. That will take nothing away from you, will it?
FLOUNCE. [100]   The man's an ass altogether!—If my lady gives twelve guineas for the binding of an album, as they call it, and hundreds for prints, and old stones, and rubbish, and rattletraps beside, what good will that do to me? when, I dare say, she'll scrub off her wardrobe, and go about at last, as my Lady Blackletter does, in a gown that our curate's wife would scarcely put on when she goes visiting amongst all the poor sickly bodies of the parish. I knows very well how it would be; so I hope marriage is now really at hand, to save us from worse.

[Page 459]
BUTLER. I hope so, too, Mrs. Flounce; for I fear the fine books might injure the cellar as well as the wardrobe.
FLOUNCE. O never fear that; she would have poets and ancient philosophers coming about her in plenty, and they like a good dinner and good wine as well as any body; much better than lovers do, I trow. But we must gossip no longer here; you have set out the flowers beautifully; so take them to the drawing-room directly.
                                         [Exeunt severally, Butler carrying the flowers. SCENE II. A narrow Passage running along the front of the Stage. Enter Footman and a Boy, crossing and jostling one another. FOOTMAN. Stupid oaf! what makes you run so?
BOY. The gentlefolks want more bread and butter.

[Page 460]
FOOTMAN. Deuce choke them! is all that was provided for them done already? and Master Lawry gone to bed too. I hope they want nothing else?
BOY. Oh, but they do! they wants more cream and more cups and saucers.
FOOTMAN. The devil they do! they will never have done wanting. (Bell rings.) And they are as impatient as the Grand Turk: make haste, you oaf.
                                         [Giving Boy a kick as they hurry off and exeunt. SCENE III. The Scene opens, and discovers Sir Cameron Kunliffe, Brightly, Thornhill, Latitia, Emma, and Franklin beside her, occasionally employed in pouring out tea, &c., seated round a Table, while laughing and talking is heard as the Scene opens. SIR CAMERON. Ha, ha, ha! and all that passes upon you, my good Thornhill, for disinterested generosity.
THORNHILL. And what should it pass for?

[Page 461]
SIR CAMERON. Some expectation of a legacy, perhaps, from that old Lady Bountiful of the neighbourhood, who would like to enrich such an amiable philanthropist.
THORNHILL. But that old lady was dead, Kunliffe.
SIR CAMERON. O what a loss to the topers at the Cat and Bagpipes! for they will now be obliged to support their own families and drink less.
EMMA. Don't be so hard-hearted, Sir Cameron.
BRIGHTLY. You must make some allowance for one who holds a justice-court every Friday, and has all the misdoings of the parish brought before him.
THORNHILL. Where, thanks to his natural gift of suspectiveness, he detects as much knavery, and dispenses as prompt justice, as the sage governor of Barataria.
EMMA. And there is a droll look on his face at this moment, as if some curious case had been lately before him.

[Page 462]
LATITIA. Is it so, Sir Cameron? Do tell us about it.
SIR CAMERON. As it proves the ingenuity of your sex and the simplicity of ours, you shall have it. A country [25]   girl appeared in court the other day, who would oblige the booby son of a small farmer to marry her, because, on his account, she had refused the addresses of a very advantageous match.
EMMA. And how did she prove that?
SIR CAMERON. By calling upon the booby to declare that he had listened at the window of an old malt-house, and heard the shrill voice of his mistress in earnest discourse within with a gruff-voiced man, whose offers of marriage she refused very saucily, on account of her attachment to himself, poor simpleton.
BRIGHTLY. And whether do you call him simpleton, for believing his own ears, or for giving evidence against himself?
SIR CAMERON. For the first, assuredly. What one believes as a fool, one is bound to declare as an honest man. And he would have smarted for his honesty, too,
[Page 463]
had it not been for the accidental intrusion of a plough-boy, who at the moment slipt softly into the said malt-house, and discovered, that though two voices had issued from the house, there was but one person within.
BRIGHTLY. Clever hussy! she deserved a husband for the trick.
SIR CAMERON, [50]   And she should have had one suited to her merits, could I have transferred to her a smart-looking fellow, who had eloped with the prettiest girl in the parish, on the evening of her wedding-day, just to take her out of his friend the bridegroom's hands, as he gallantly stated it.
LATITIA. I think he was mated very suitably with the woman he eloped with. The bridegroom was well quit of her; she was not worth contending for.
SIR CAMERON. Yes; but it was not for her they contended. No, truly; the matter to be decided was, whether the man who had lost the bride, or the man who had got her, should pay the expenses of the wedding dinner.
LATITIA. Oh, the worldly creatures!

[Page 464]
EMMA. But to return to the old subject of fashions, Mr. Brightly, which was interrupted by Mr. Thornhill's admiration of his friend's liberality.
BRIGHTLY. Well, then, I ventured to say something, didn't I, against the short bunchy skirts and wide bladder-sleeves of the present belles, who seem to make a mock of their grandmothers for aiming to appear tall and slender.
EMMA. But their heads are dressed more simply, and [75]   their characters are altogether more unaffected and natural and unpretending.
BRIGHTLY. Not a jot; such a woman as fourscore years ago would have been seen at a public sale with a wide-flounced farthingale and a lapdog under her arm, bidding for a China mandarin, is now to be met with at a morning lecture, with pencil and note-book in hand, losing two words of the learned professor's discourse for every one she writes down.
LATITIA. Nay, fie upon you for a discourteous knight! Do you come here on the summons of a lady to attend her tea-table, for the express purpose of casting ridicule on the whole sex?

[Page 465]
BRIGHTLY. I thank you, Miss Vane, for reminding me of the purpose which brought me here; and the more so, that it is to hold judgment on yourself. But it cannot be done in this informal lazy manner; let every body stand round me, that I may open the proceedings with official decorum.
                                         [They all rise from the tea-table and arrange themselves on the front of the Stage.] Latitia Vane, Spinster, is called for. LATITIA. Present in the court.
BRIGHTLY. You compeer before me, charged with high crimes and misdemeanors committed against the King's liege subject, Sir Cameron Kunliffe, Baronet, tending to the great injury of his character, [100]   to the impeding his usefulness in the country, and to the destroying of his influence in social society.
LATITIA (holding up her hands). What a wicked creature I must be! But how do you make it to appear against me, my Lord Justice?
BRIGHTLY. It is proved against the defendant, that on the
[Page 466]
10th day of September of the present year, she sent for a certain phrenologist to her house, pretending to know the dispositions of men by certain marks on the surfaces of their pericraniums, and did wittingly and with malice prepense persuade the said Sir Cameron to submit his head to be examined by the said phrenologist.
LATITIA. Wittingly, but not maliciously: had not foolishly been a better word?
EMMA. Surely you will change the word so far in favour of the defendant.
BRIGHTLY. Not a bit: she wittingly entreated him to run the risk, knowing that there was risk, of losing that which, we are told by high authority, is better than gold. Who will live in amity and confidence with one who is scientifically proved to be predisposed to deeds of cruelty and destruction? Who will be connected with such a [125]   one? who will give his daughter in marriage to such a one? who will accept of such a predisposed ruffian for her husband?
LATITIA. But it is all set right now, and has no evil consequences.

[Page 467]
BRIGHTLY. I beg your pardon, lady: an evil report and its refutation are no fair match for one another. The first runs far a-field with the pace of a race-horse, the second follows after like a poor cudgelled donkey, and never clears a fourth part of the ground.
EMMA. You must own, my dear aunt, that this makes against you. I fear you will be obliged to stand in the church porch, with a sheet about you, for defamation.
SIR CAMERON. That would spread evil report the further.
BRIGHTLY. The prosecutor speaks reason; that would be no compensation at all for the injury, and he will not receive it as such.
LATITIA. What can be done, then, Mr. Justice?
BRIGHTLY. When the character of a bachelor is so injured by any woman, that he is, or may be, prevented from finding a suitable mate to solace his days, she is bound—in honour bound—to marry him herself.
THORNHILL. [150]   A reparation, I believe, which they are generally
[Page 468]
willing to make: I beg pardon; I mean, in most cases.
LATITIA. O dear, dear! how wide you stray from the purpose!
BRIGHTLY. That is as it may afterwards appear, lady.
THORNHILL. He has a sinister intention, Miss Vane.
BRIGHTLY. Keep silence in Court, I say.—The sinister intention is on his side, who, for his own interest, would prevent you from being just. But I would not press the matter upon you too severely; the reparation shall be left to your own discretion; but you must decide upon what it is to be, before the Court break up.
LATITIA. Decide so soon! Will not to-morrow do, or the day after to-morrow, or the day after that?
BRIGHTLY. No, neither to-morrow nor any following morrow will do; you must pronounce your own sentence before the Court break up.

[Page 469]
LATITIA (going about in a bewildered manner). O, dear! what can I do? what can I say? how shall I decide?
BRIGHTLY. Shall I decide for you, Madam?
LATITIA. Do, do! good Brightly, and don't tease me any more.
BRIGHTLY. And do you promise to abide by my judgment?
LATITIA. [175]   I do promise: and you will be merciful.
BRIGHTLY. Well, then, be it known to all present, that inasmuch as you have nefariously injured the worthy baronet aforesaid, and it is your own indecision that prevents you from making him just reparation for the same, I adjudge that you, from this very time (looking at his watch), shall remain under his command for five minutes and a half, bound afterwards faithfully to fulfil what in this given time he shall decree.
LATITIA. Let it be so; five minutes will soon be over, and he will be merciful.

[Page 470]
SIR CAMERON. I fear you will not think so, Madam; for I command you to marry me to-morrow morning, before eleven of the clock.
LATITIA. O, shocking haste and precipitation! Not even a few months allowed to prepare my wedding-clothes!
SIR CAMERON. Not one hour beyond what I have said.
LATITIA. How peremptory you are!
EMMA. The best quality, my dear aunt, that your husband can have to match with your indecision.
LATITIA. What! are you against me, child? It is not for your interest.
EMMA. It is for my interest if it be for yours; and let me put this hand, which has always been kind to [200]   me, into a stronger hand, that will bear the rule over it in kindness. (Putting the hand of Latitia into that of Sir Cameron, who receives it with gallant respect.)

[Page 471]
SIR CAMERON. Thanks, gentle Emma; to find a friend in thee is more than I expected.
EMMA. Ah, Sir Cameron! but you should have expected it.
THORNHILL. If he could, without proof, have supposed any one to be good, it should have been this young lady.
BRIGHTLY. But he is too wise for that.
SIR CAMERON. Spare me, spare me; do not mar my present happiness by making me feel how little I deserve it.
FRANKLIN (advancing from the rear to Sir Cameron ). And may I be permitted to offer, perhaps, unexpected congratulations?
SIR CAMERON. Yes, thou mayest, and also advise and devise with my solicitor as much as thou wilt. That matter shall be no longer an annoyance to me.
FRANKLIN. What matter can you possibly allude to?

[Page 472]
SIR CAMERON. O! you are quite ignorant of a certain misworded testament, the defects of which, by the management of a clever attorney, might be turned to thine own advantage: thou pleadest ignorant, very ignorant of all this.
BRIGHTLY. Ha, ha, ha! he will be an impudent fellow [225]   indeed if he, before my face, plead ignorant of that which he told me without reserve some three or four years ago.
SIR CAMERON. Is it possible? did Hardy betray me then? (To Franklin. )
FRANKLIN. No; but his clerk employed to copy the deed repeated to me soon after the very passage, word for word.
SIR CAMERON. And thou hast known it all this while, and never sought to take advantage of it till lately?
FRANKLIN. And you have known me all this while, nay, from my childhood, Sir Cameron, and can yet suppose that I should wish to wrest from you by law what natural justice and the intentions of the testator fairly bestow upon you.

[Page 473]
SIR CAMERON (covering his face with his hands). Say whatever you please to me: I am humbled to the dust; my infirmity is crime.
BRIGHTLY. Since you invite us to say whatever we please, I say that your crime has been punished already; for you have been oftener cheated and duped by your own supposed knowledge and your distrust of mankind, than the veriest flaxen-headed simpleton in the parish.
SIR CAMERON. Hold, hold, Brightly; I will not succumb to thee so meekly. If you have any candour, you must acknowledge I had cause for suspicion. [250]   Any man would have been startled at the disappearance of that key after the mischievous urchin had been so strangely secreted in my library.
BRIGHTLY. Yes, a very strong circumstance, indeed, to justify all this disturbance. Did not you give me a key to let myself out by the small gate of your shrubbery?
SIR CAMERON. And what has that to do with it?
BRIGHTLY. It would not open the shrubbery-gate, and I
[Page 474]
went round another way. (Giving him a key.) But, perhaps, it might have opened your strong box. I should have returned it to you sooner, had I not learned from your locksmith, that he had already changed the lock of that most secret repository.
SIR CAMERON. The very key, I must, with confusion, acknowledge. Is it possible that I should have taken the wrong key from that corner, and that having given a key to you should have entirely escaped my memory?
BRIGHTLY. Every thing is possible, when the imagination of a suspicious man is concerned.
SIR CAMERON. I am beaten to the ground! I am lower in my own opinion than my worst enemy would [275]   have placed me, or even (pointing to Brightly ) this good-natured friend.—Dear Latitia, I am sensible of my infirmity; I am incapable of being a good husband to any woman; and though it has long been my ambition to be yours, I remit your engagement and restore you to your liberty.
BRIGHTLY (eagerly). No, no, no! she is too generous to desert you in your hour of humiliation.

[Page 475]
THORNHILL. Brightly, you are acting unfairly. You have no right to suggest to the lady what she ought to do.
BRIGHTLY. I don't act unfairly: we were each left at liberty to influence.
LATITIA. What is the meaning of this altercation?
BRIGHTLY. I care not for your paddock.
THORNHILL. Nor I for your picture; but let each of them be lost or won fairly.
LATITIA. What, in the name of wonder, are they disputing about? (To Sir Cameron. )
SIR CAMERON. There is a bet in the case, I dare say.
BRIGHTLY (to Sir Cameron ). And if there be, your searching fancy will find it out.
SIR CAMERON. It concerns my marriage with Miss Vane;
[Page 476]
tricky fellows! I wish we could contrive to make you both lose.
THORNHILL. [300]   That is impossible; but at least let us wait till it be absolutely decided. The lady may accept her proffered liberty, or may change her mind, before eleven o'clock to-morrow morning.
LATITIA. Ay, now is my turn to have my infirmity exposed. But it only convinces me that I am a more suitable match for Sir Cameron, who in his state of humiliation, as he calls it, will learn to have patience with me; and I restore to him the hand he has released.
BRIGHTLY. Bravo! they are an equal match, and a happy union may it prove.
SIR CAMERON (to Franklin ). Come hither, cousin. You look less happy than I could wish; and happy as I now am, I wish to make myself a little happier. I have said that the thoughts of that bungled deed shall annoy me no more. I cannot part with that small estate upon which my mansion is placed, with its park and ancient oaks around it.— But the full value of the whole you shall receive from me, as soon as proper deeds of conveyance,
[Page 477]
in which there shall be no mistakes, can be made out.
FRANKLIN. It is too much, cousin; I cannot—I cannot receive it.
SIR CAMERON. [325]   Fie upon thee, man! hast thou an infirmity, too,—the infirmity of pride? It will promote my happiness: and it may enable thee, as soon as thou art in the receipt of ninety pounds a year from thy profession, to promote thine own, if thou canst prevail upon some good girl to unite her fate with thine. Dost thou wot of such a one? perhaps thou dost.
THORNHILL (aside, eyeing Franklin and Emma anxiously). Now is the critical moment to strengthen my hopes or my fear.
                                         [ Franklin approaches Emma timidly, who motions him away, and he obeys, while Thornhill, with his face brightening up, goes close to her on the other side.] THORNHILL (aside). I see how it is, charming Emma; and may it not encourage me to hope that the engaging child from whose innocent head I cut off this fair
[Page 478]
curl (taking from his breast a paper) some ten years ago, will now, in her womanhood, show me some favour?
BRIGHTLY (overhearing him). You have a very soft voice, Thornhill, but my ears are quick. What is the meaning of these gentle approaches?
EMMA (to Thornhill ). Can my memory be so treacherous? Have we ever met before last spring, when I saw you in Brook Street?
THORNHILL. Yes, gentle creature, I saw you at your uncle's in Cheshire, where you were my harmless playfellow, and I became, by your own consent, [350]   possessed of this cherished token, (turning to Franklin, who goes up to him sternly,) which shall be taken from me only with my life.
BRIGHTLY. Thornhill, thou art making a fool of thyself. The pretty child who was thy playfellow, and on whose head that curl once grew, bears indeed the same name with this lady, is her cousin, and has a strong resemblance to her, but is, I believe, at this moment in Rutlandshire, collecting pretty poesies for her album. Send her one of thy
[Page 479]
sonnets, and thou wilt stand in as great favour with her as ever.
THORNHILL. Why did you not tell me this before?
BRIGHTLY. How should I divine all the romantic fancies of thy brain?
SIR CAMERON. I think his patience in giving that restless urchin lessons from Euclid, might have led you pretty near the truth.
BRIGHTLY. To be sure it might have done so, had Nature endowed me with the organ of suspectiveness.
SIR CAMERON. Say no more upon that subject, I beseech you. Any blackguard may henceforth pull my watch from its pocket, and I will only suppose that he wants, as the crowd presses round, to see what it is o'clock, poor youth!
LATITIA. [375]   And I will be so constant to my purpose, that the most methodical lady of a parish district may make an appointment with me, and be sure of my being at her door, as her household clock gives warning for the hour. I will not even
[Page 480]
change the colour of a scarf or a top-knot, having once said to my milliner, “It shall be this.”
BRIGHTLY. But how long will it be ere you have said so, when all the other colours of the rainbow are laid in array before you?
LATITIA. No more sarcastic insinuations! Sir Cameron and I will endeavour to reform; and a good beginning is equal to half the task, when there are kind friends to give encouragement.
                                         [The Curtain drops. NOTES
1
BOY
BRIGHTLY
BRIGHTLY AND THORNHILL
BUTLER
DR. CRANY
EMMA
FIRST LADY
FIRST SERVANT
FLOUNCE
FOOTMAN
FRANKLIN
HOUSEKEEPER
HUMPHRIES
LATITIA
LAWRY
LOCKSMITH
OMNES
SECOND LADY
SERVANT
SIR CAMERON
THIRD LADY
THORNHILL

Title: The match (1836)

Publication title: Dramas, By Joanna Baillie. In Three Volumes

Pages: 3 v.

Publication date: 1836

Publication year: 1836

Publisher/Imprint: Printed for Longman, Rees, Orme

Physical description: 3 v.

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: London

Publication subject: Literature

Source type: Book

Language of publication: English

Document type: Book, Comedy

Document note: The match.; Comedy.; Date first published: 1836.; Date first performed: Unknown or unacted.

Publication note: Preliminaries and introductory matter omitted; The following plays have been taken from this source:; From Vol. I; The Alienated Manor: a comedy. In five acts; From Vol. II; The Stripling: a tragedy. In five acts. Written in prose; Enthusiasm: a comedy. In three acts; From Vol. III; Witchcraft: a tragedy in prose. In five acts; The Homicide: a tragedy in prose, with occasional passages of verse. In three acts; The Match: a comedy. In three acts; .

Accession number: D0100061

ProQuest document ID: 2138577399

Document URL: http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/match-1836/docview/2138577399/se-2?accountid=14270

Database: Literature Online

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2022 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions