____________________________________________________________

The tryal (1798 (volume one), 1802 (volume two), 1812 (volume three))

Author: Baillie, Joanna

Publication info: A Series Of Plays: in Which It Is Attempted To Delineate the Stronger Passions Of the Mind . 3 v. London: Printed for ... T. Cadell ... and W. Davies, 1798 (volume one), 1802 (volume two), 1812 (volume three).

http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/tryal-1798-volume-one-1802-two-1812-three/docview/2138577170/se-2?accountid=14270

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://temple-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/openurl/01TULI/TULI??url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;genre=book&amp;sid=ProQ:ProQ%3Aed&amp;atitle=&amp;title=The+tryal+%281798+%28volume+one%29%2C+1802+%28volume+two%29%2C+1812+%28volume+three%29%29&amp;issn=&amp;date=1798-01-01&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;spage=195&amp;au=Baillie%2C+Joanna&amp;isbn=&amp;jtitle=&amp;btitle=The+tryal+%281798+%28volume+one%29%2C+1802+%28volume+two%29%2C+1812+%28volume+three%29%29&amp;rft_id=info:eric/D0100065&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: THE TRYAL: A COMEDY.
[Page ]
Front matter 1 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Mr. Withrington.
Mr. Harwood.
Sir Loftus Prettyman.
Mr. Opal.
Mr. Royston.
Humphry.
Jonathan.
Thomas.
Servants, &c.
WOMEN. Agnes , Niece to Withrington.
Mariane , Niece to Withrington.
Miss Eston.
Mrs. Betty , Maide to Agnes.
Scene in Bath, and in Mr. Withrington's house, in the environs of Bath.
[Page 195]
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. Mr. Withrington's house: Enter Withrington and his two Nieces hanging upon his arms, coaxing him in a playful manner as they advance towards the front of the Stage. With. Poo, poo, get along, young gipsies, and dont teaze me any more.
Ag. So we will, my good sir, when you have granted our suit.
Mar. Do, dear uncle, it will be so pleasant!
With. Get along, get along. Dont think to wheedle me into it. It would be very pleasant, truly, to see an old fellow, with a wig upon his bald pate, making one in a holy-day mummery with a couple of mad caps.
Ag. Nay, dont lay the fault upon the wig, good sir, for it is as youthful, and as sly, and as saucy looking as the best head of hair in the county. As for your old wig indeed, there was so much curmudgeon-like austerity about it, that young people fled from before it, as, I dare say, the birds do at present, for I am sure that it is stuck up in some cherry orchard, by this time, to frighten the sparrows.

[Page 196]
With. You are mistaken, young mistress, it is up stairs in my wig-box.
Ag. Well I am glad it is any where but upon your pate, uncle. (Turning his face towards Mariane.) Look at him, pray! is he not ten years [25]   younger since he wore it? Is there one bit of an old grumbler to be seen about him now?
Mar. He is no more like the man he was than I am like my god-mother. (Clapping his shoulder.) You must even do as we have bid you, sir, for this excuse will never bring you off.
With. Poo, poo, it is a foolish girl's whimsy: I'll have nothing to do with it.
Ag. It is a reasonable woman's desire, gentle guardian, and you must consent to it. For if I am to marry at all, I am resolved to have a respectable man, and a man who is attached to me, and to find out such a one, in my present situation, is impossible. I am provoked beyond all patience with your old greedy lords, and match-making aunts, introducing their poor noodle heirs-apparent to me, like so many dolts dressed our for a race ball. Your ambitious esquires, and proud obsequious baronets are intolerable, and your rakish younger brothers are nauseous: such creatures only surround me, whilst men of sense keep at a distance, and think me as foolish as the company I keep. One would swear I were made of amber, to attract all the dust and chaff of the community.
With. There is some truth in this 'faith.
Ag. [50]   You see how it is with me: so my dear
[Page 197]
loving good uncle (Coaxing him) do let Mariane take my place for a little while. We are newly come to Bath, no body knows us: we have been but at one ball, and as I went in plain dress, and Mariane looks so much better than me, she has already been mistaken for the heiress, and I for her portionless cousin: I have told you how we shall manage it, do lend us your assistance!
With. So in the disguise of a portionless spinster, you are to captivate some man of sense, I suppose.
Ag. I would fain have it so.
With. Go, go, thou art a fool, Agnes! who will fall in love with a little ordinary girl like thee? why there is not one feature in thy face that a man would give a farthing for.
Mar. You are very saucy, uncle.
Ag. I should despair of my beauty to be sure, since I am reckoned so much like you, my dear uncle; yet old nurse told me that a rich lady, a great lady, and the prettiest lady that ever wore silk, fell in love, once on a time, with Mr. Anthony, and would have followed him to the world's end too, if it had not been for an old hunks of a father, [75]   who deserved to be drubed for his pains. Don't you think he did, sir?
With. (endeavouring to look angry.) Old nurse is a fool, and you are an impudent hussy. I'll hear no more of this nonsense. Breaks from them and goes towards the door: they run after him, and draw him back again.)

[Page 198]
Ag. Nay, good sir, we have not quite done with you yet: grant our request, and then scamper off as you please.
Mar. I'll hold both your arms till you grant it.
With. to Mar. And what makes you so eager about it, young lady? you expect, I suppose, to get a husband by the trick. O fy, fy! the poorest girl in England would blush at such a thought, who calls herself an honest one.
Ag. And Mariane would reject the richest man in England who could harbour such a suspicion. But give yourself no uneasiness about this, sir, she need not go a husband-hunting, for she is already engaged.— (Mariane looks frightened, and makes signs to Agnes over her uncle's shoulder, which she answers with a smile of encouragement.)
With. Engaged! she is very good, truly, to manage all this matter herself, being afraid to give me any trouble, I suppose. And pray what fool has she picked out from the herd, to enter into this precious engagement with!
Ag. A foolish enough fellow to be sure, your [100]   favourite nephew, cousin Edward.
With. Hang, the silly booby! how could he be such an ideot? but it can't be, it shan't be,—it is folly to put myself into a passion about it. (To Mariane, who puts her hand on his shoulder to soothe him.) Hold off your hands, ma'am. This is news indeed to amuse me with of a morning.
Ag. Yes, uncle, and I can tell you more news;
[Page 199]
for they are not only engaged, but as soon as he returns from abroad they are to be married.
With. Well, well, let them marry, in the devil's name, and go a begging if they please.
Ag. No, gentle guardian, they need not go a begging; they will have a good fortune to support them.
With. Yes, yes, they will get a prize in the lottery, or find out the philosopher's stone, and coin their old shoes into guineas.
Ag. No, sir, it is not that way the fortune is to come.
With. No; he has been following some knighterrant then, I suppose, and will have an island in the South Sea for his pains.
Ag. No, you have not guessed it yet. (Stroaking his hand gently.) Did you ever hear of a good, kind, rich uncle of theirs, the generous Mr. Withrington? [125]   he is to settle a handsome provision upon them as soon as they are married, and leave them his fortune at last.
With. (lifting up his hands.) Well, I must say thou art the impudentest little jade in the kingdom. But did you never hear that this worthy uncle of theirs, having got a new wig, which makes him ten years younger than he was, is resolved to embrace the opportunity, and seek out a wife for himself?
Ag. O! that is nothing to the purpose; for what I have said about the fortune must happen, though he should seek out a score of wives.

[Page 200]
With. Must happen! but I say it shall not happen. Whether should you or I know best?
Ag. Why me, to be sure.
With. Ha, ha, ha! how so baggage?
Ag. (resting her arm on his shoulder, looking archly in his face.) You don't know perhaps, that when I went to Scotland last summer, I travelled far, and far, as the tale says, and farther than I can tell, till I came to the Isle of Sky, where every body has the second sight, and has nothing to do but tear a little hole in a tartan plaidy, and peering through it, in this manner, sees every thing past, present, and to come. Now, you must know, [150]   I gave an old woman half a crown and a roll of tobacco for a peep or two through her plaid, and what do you think I saw, uncle;
With. The devil dancing a hornpipe, I suppose.
Ag. There was somebody dancing to be sure, but it was not the devil though. Who do you think it was now?
With. Poo, poo!
Ag. It was uncle himself, at Mariane's wedding, leading down the first dance, with the bride. I saw a sheet of parchment in a corner too, signed with his own blessed hand, and a very handsome settlement it was. So he led down the first dance himself, and we all followed after him, as merry as so many hay-makers.
With. Thou hast had a sharp sight, faith!
Ag. And I took a second peep through the plaidy, and what do you think I saw then, sir?

[Page 201]
With. Nay, prate on as thou wilt.
Ag. A genteel family house, where Edward and Mariane dwelt, and several little brats running up and down in it. Some of them so tall, and so tall, and some of them no taller than this. And there came good uncle amongst them, and they all flocked about him so merrily! every body was so [175]   glad to see him, the very scullions from the kitchen were glad; and methought he looked as well pleased himself as any of them. Don't you think he did, sir?
With. Have done with thy prating.
Ag. I have not done yet, good sir; for I took another peep still, and then I saw a most dismal changed family indeed. There was a melancholy sick bed set out, in the best chamber, every face was sad, and all the children were weeping. There was one dark eyed rogue amongst them, called little Anthony, and he threw away his bread and butter, and roared like a young bull, for woe's me! old uncle was dying. (Observing Withrington affected.) But old uncle recovered though, and looked as stout as a veteran again. So I gave the old woman her plaidy, and would not look through any more.
With. Thou art the wildest little witch in the world, and wilt never be at rest till thou hast got every thing thine own way, I believe.
Ag. I thank you, I thank you, dear uncle! (leaping round his neck,) it shall be even so, and I shall have my own little boon into the bargain.

[Page 202]
With. I did not say so.
Ag. [200]   But I know it will be so, and many thanks to you, my dear good uncle! (Mariane ventures to come from behind,—Withrington looks gently to her, she holds out her hand, he hesitates, and Agnes joins their hands together, giving them a hearty shake.)
With. Come, come, let me get away from you now: you are a couple of insinuating gipsies.
                                         [ Exit , hastily. Mar. (embracing Agnes.) Well, heaven bless thee, my sweet Agnes! thou hast done marvels for me. You gave me a fright though; I thought we were ruined.
Ag. O! I knew I should get the better of him some way or other. What a good worthy heart he has! you dont know how dearly I love this old uncle of ours.
Mar. I wonder how it is. I used to think him severe and unreasonable, with his fiddle faddle fancies about delicacy and decorum; but since you came amongst us, Agnes, you have so coaxed him, and laughed at him, and played with him, that he has become almost as frolicksome as ourselves.
Ag. Let us set about our project immediately, No body knows us here but lady Fade and Miss Eston: We must let them both into the secret: Lady Fade is confined with bad health, and though Miss Eston, I believe, would rather tell a secret than hold her tongue, yet as long as there are streets and carriages, and balls and ribbons, and parlours
[Page 203]
[225]   and pantries to talk of, there can be no great danger from her.
Mar. O! we shall do very well. How I long to frolick it away, in all the rich trappings of heirship, amongst those sneaking wretches the fortune-hunters! They have neglected me as a poor girl, but I will play the deuce amongst them as a rich one.
Ag. You will acquit yourself very handsomely, I dare say, and find no lack of admirers.
Mar. I have two or three in my eye just now, but of all men living I have set my heart upon humbling Sir Loftus. He insulted a friend of mine last winter, to ingratiate himself with an envious woman of quality, but I will be revenged upon him, O! how I will scorn him, and toss up my nose at him! I hate him like a toad.
Ag. That is not the way to be revenged upon him, silly girl! He is haughty and reserved in his manners; and though not altogether without understanding, has never suffered a higher idea to get footing in his noddle than that of appearing a man of consequence and fashion, and though he has no happiness but in being admired as a fine gentleman, and no existence but at an assembly, [250]   he appears there with all the haughty gravity, and careless indifference of a person superiour to such paltry amusements. Such a man as this must be laughed at, not scorned, familiarity and contempt must be his portion.
Mar. He shall have it then. And as for his
[Page 204]
admirer and imitator, Jack Opal, who has for these ten years past, so successfully performed every kind of fine gentlemanship, which every new fool brought into fashion, any kind of bad treatment, I suppose, that happens to come into my head will be good enough for him.
Ag. Quite good enough. You have set him down for one of your admirers too?
Mar. Yes, truly, and a great many more besides.
Ag. Did you observe in the ball-room last night, a genteel young man, with a dark grey eye, and a sensible countenance, but with so little of the foppery of the fashion about him, that one took him at a distance for a much older man?
Mar. Wore he not a plain brownish coat? and stood he not very near us great part of the evening?
Ag. Yes, the very same. Pray endeavour to attract him, Mariane.
Mar. If you are very desirous to see him in [275]   my train, I'll try him.
Ag. No, not desirous, neither.
Mar. Then wherefore should I try?
Ag. Because I would have you try every art to win him, and I would not have him to be won.
Mar. O! I comprehend it now! This is the sensible man we are in quest of.
Ag. I shall not be sorry if it proves so. I have enquired who he is, as I shall tell you by and by, and what I have learned of him I like. Is not his appearance prepossessing, cousin Mariane?

[Page 205]
Mar. I dot know, he is too grave and dignified for such a girl as thou art; I fear we shall waste our labour upon him.
Ag. But he does not look always so. He kept very near me, if it did not look vain I should say followed me all the evening, and many a varied expression his countenance assumed. But when I went away arm in arm with my uncle, in our usual good humoured way, I shall never forget the look of pleasant approbation with which he followed me. I had learnt but a little while before the mistake which the company made in regard to us, and at that moment the idea of this project came across my mind like a flash of lightning.
Mar. [300]   Very well, gentle cousin; the task you assign me is pleasing to my humour; and the idea of promoting your happiness at the same time will make it delightful. Let me see, how many lovers shall I have, one, two, three. (Counting on her fingers.)
Ag. I can tell you of one lover more than you wot of.
Mar. Pray who is he?
Ag. Our distant cousin the great 'squire, and man of business, from—shire, he writes to my uncle that he will be in Bath to-day, upon business of the greatest importance, which he explains to him in three pages of close written paper; but whether it is to court me for himself, or for his son, or to solicit a great man, who is here, for a place, no mortal on earth can discover.

[Page 206]
Mar. Well, let him come, I shall manage them all. O! if my Edward were here just how, how he would laugh at us!
Enter Servant . Ser. Miss Eston.
Mar. Let us run out of her way, and say we are not at home. She will sit and talk these two hours.
Ag. But you forgot we have something to say to her. (To the servant.) Shew her up stairs to my dressing-room.
                                         [ Exit servant. Mar. [325]   Pray let us run up stairs before her, or she will arrest us here with her chat.
                                         [Exeunt. Miss Eston (without.) And it is a very bad thing for all that; I never could abide it. I wonder your master don't stop (Enters walking straight across the stage, still speaking) up those nasty chinks, there is such a wind in the hall, 'tis enough to give one a hoarseness. Bye the bye Mrs. Mumblecake is sadly to-day; has your lady sent to enquire for her William? I wonder if her ( Exit , still talking without) old coachman has left her; I saw a new face on the, &c. &c.

[Page 207]
SCENE II. The fields before Mr. Withrington's house. Enter Agnes, Mariane , and Miss Eston , who seems still busy talking, from the house, and passing over the Stage arm in arm, Exeunt. Enter, by the same side by which they went out, Sir Loftus Prettyman , and Harwood , who stands looking behind him, as if he followed something with his eyes very eagerly. Sir Loft. (Advancing to the front of the stage, and speaking to himself.) How cursedly unlucky this is now! if she had come out but a few moments sooner, I should have passed her walking arm in arm with a British peer. How provokingly these things always happen with me; (observing Harwood.) What! is he staring after her too? (aloud) What are you looking at, Harwood? does she walk well?
Har. I can't tell how she walks, but I could stand and gaze after her till the sun went down upon me.
Sir Loft. She is a fine woman, I grant you.
Har. (vastly pleased.) I knew she would please, it is impossible she should not! There is something so delightful in the play of her countenance, it would even make a plain woman beautiful.
Sir Loft. She is a fine woman, and that is no despicable praise from one who is accustomed to the elegance of fashionable beauty.

[Page 208]
Har. I would not compare her to any thing so trifling and insipid.
Sir Loft. She has one advantage which fashionable beauty seldom possesses.
Har. What do you mean?
Sir Loft. A large fortune.
Har. (looking disappointed.) [25]   Poo, it is not the heiress I mean.
Sir Loft. Is it t'other girl you are raving about, she is showy at a distance, I admit, but as awkward as a dairy maid when near you; and her tongue goes as fast as if she were repeating a pater noster.
Har. What, do you think I am silly enough to be caught with that magpie?
Sir Loft. Who is it then, Harwood? I see no body with Miss Withrington but Miss Eston, and the poor little creature her cousin.
Har. Good god! what a contemptible perversion of taste do interest and fashion create! But it is all affectation. (Looking contemptuously at him.)
Sir Loft. (smiling contemptuously in return.) Ha, ha, ha! I see how it is with you, Harwood, and I beg pardon too. The lady is very charming, I dare say; upon honour I never once looked in her face. She is a dependant relation of Miss Withrington's, I believe: now I never take notice of such girls, for if you do it once they expect you to do it again. I dont choose that every little creature should say she is acquainted with Sir Loftus Prettyman; I am sparing of my attentions,
[Page 209]
[50]   that she on whom I really bestow them may have the more reason to boast.
Har. You are right, Prettyman, she who boasts of your attentions should receive them all herself, that nobody else may know how little worth they are.
Sir Loft. You are severe this morning, Mr. Harwood, but you do not altogether comprehend me, I believe. I know perhaps more of the polite world than a studious templar can be supposed to do, and I assure you, men of fashion, upon this principle, are sparing of their words too, that they may be listened to more attentively when they do speak.
Har. You are very right still, Sir Loftus, for if they spoke much, I'll be hang'd if they would get any body to listen to them at all.
Sir Loft. (haughtily.) There is another reason why men of fashion are not profuse of their words, inferior people are apt to forget themselves, and despise what is too familiar.
Har. Dont take so much pains to make me comprehend that the more fools speak the more people will despise them; I never had a clearer conviction of it in my life.
Sir Loft. (haughtily.) [75]   Good morning, sir, I see Lord Saunter in the other walk, and I must own I prefer the company of one who knows, at least, the common rules of politeness.
                                         [Exit. Har. (alone.) What a contemptible creature it is! He would prefer the most affected ideot, who
[Page 210]
boasts a little fashion or consequence, as he calls it, to the most beautiful native character in the world. Here comes another fool, who has been gazing too, but I will not once mention her before him.
Enter Opal . Op. Good morning, Harwood, I have been fortunate just now! I have met some fine girls, 'faith!
Har. I am glad you have met with any thing so agreeable; they are all equally charming to you, I suppose.
Op. Nay, Harwood, I know how to distinguish. There is a little animated creature amongst them, all life and spirit, on my soul I could almost be in love with her.
Har. Ha! thou hast more discernment than I reckoned upon. If that goose, Sir Loftus, did not spoil thee, Jack, thou would'st be a very good fellow after all. Why I must tell you, my good Opal, that lady whom you admire, is the sweetest [100]   little gipsey in England.
Op. Is she indeed? I wish I had taken a better look of her face then; but she wears such a cursed plume of blue feathers nodding over her nose, there is scarcely one half of it to be seen.
Har. (staring at him with astonishment.) As I breathe! he has fallen in love with the magpie!
Op. And what is so surprising in this pray? Does not all the world allow Miss Withrington the heiress to be a fine woman?

[Page 211]
Har. That is not the heiress, Jack, (pointing off the stage) the tall lady in the middle is she. But if your Dulcinea could coin her words into farthings, she would be one of the best matches in the kingdom.
Op. Pest take it! she was pointed out to me as Miss Withrington. Pest take my stupidity! the girl is well enough, but she is not altogether—
                                         (Mumbling to himself.) Har. So you bestowed all your attention on this blue feathered lady, and let the other two pass by unnoticed.
Op. No, not unnoticed neither: Miss Withrington is too fine a figure to be overlooked any where, and for the other poor little creature, who hung upon her arm so familiarly, I could not help [125]   observing her too, because I wondered Miss Withrington allowed such a dowdy looking thing to walk with her in publick. Faith? Prettyman and I locked a vulgar looking devil up in the stable the other morning, who insisted upon going with us to the pump-room: men of fashion, you know, are always plagued with paltry fellows dangling after them.
Har. Hang your men of fashion! mere paltry fellows are too good company for them.
Op. Damn it, Harwood! speak more respectfully of that class of men to whom I have the honour to belong.
Har. You mistake me, Opal, it was only the men of fashion I abused, I am too well bred to
[Page 212]
speak uncivilly in your presence of the other class you mentioned.
Op. I scorn your insinuation, sir; but whatever class of men I belong to, I praise heaven, I have nothing of the sour plodding book-worm about me.
Har. You do well to praise heaven for the endowments it has bestowed upon you, Opal; if all men were as thankful as you for this blessed gift of ignorance, we could not be said to live in an ungrateful generation.
Op. [150]   Talk away, langh at yuor own wit as much as you please, I dont mind it. I dont trouble my head to find out bons mots of a morning.
Har. You are very right, Jack, for it would be to no purpose if you did.
Op. I speak whatever comes readiest to me: I dont study speeches for company, Harwood.
Har. I hope so, Opal; you would have a laborious life of it indeed, if you could not speak nonsense extempore.
Op. (Drawing himself up, and walking haughtily to the other side of the stage.) I had no business to be so familiar with him. Sir Loftus is right; a reserved manner keeps impertinent people at a distance. (aside—Turns about, makes a very stiff bow to Harwood, and Exit .]
Har. (alone.) I am glad he is gone. What do I see! (here Mariane, Agnes, and Miss Eston walk over the bottom of the stage, attended by Sir Loftus and Opal, and Exeunt by the opposite side. Har. looking after them.) Alas, now! that such impudent
[Page 213]
fellows should be so successful, whilst I stand gazing at a distance! how lightly she trips! does she not look about to me? by heaven I'll run to her! (Runs to the bottom of the stage, and stops short.) Oh no! I cannot do it! but see, her uncle comes this way. He look'd so kindly at her, I could not help loving him; he must be a good man, I'll make up to him, and he perhaps will join the ladies afterwards.
                                         [Exit. ACT. II SCENE I. A Lodging-house. Enter Royston and Humphry , followed by Jonathan , carrying a portmanteau. Roy. What a world of business I have got upon my hands! I must set about it immediately. Come here Jonathan; I shall send you out in the first place.
Jon. Well, sir.
Roy. Take the black trunk, that is left in the hall, upon your shoulder, Jonathan, and be sure you dont run against any body with it, for that might bring us into trouble. And perhaps as you go along, you may chance to meet with some of the Duke of Bigwell's servants, or with some body who can tell you where his Grace lodges in this town, and you may enquire of them, without saying I desired you: you understand me, Jonathan?
Jon. O yes, your honour!
Roy. But first of all, however, if you see any decent
[Page 214]
hair-dresser's shop in your way, desire them to send some body here for my wig; and like enough they may tell you, at the same time, where there is an honest Town cryer to be bad; I'll have Phebe's black whelp cry'd directly; and hark ye, Jonathan, you may say as though the dog were your own, you understand, they will expect such a devil of a reward else; and pri'thee man! step into the corn [25]   market, if thou can'st find out the way, and enquire the price of oats.
Jon. Yes, please your honour, but am I to go trudging about to all these places with that great heavy trunk upon my shoulder?
Roy. No! numskull! did I not bid you carry it to the Inn, where the London stage puts up? by the bye you had better take it to the waggon— but first ask the coachman, what he charges for the carriage: you can take it to the waggon afterwards. I will suffer no man to impose upon me; you will remember all this distinctly now, as I have told it you Jonathan?
Jon. (counting to himself upon his fingers) O yes, your honour! I'll manage it all I warrant!
                                         Exit. Roy. What a world of business I have upon my hands, Humphry, I am as busy as a minister of state.
Re-enter Jonathan , scratching his head. Jon. La your honour! I have forgot all about his Grace, and the black whelp.
Roy. Damn your muddle pate; did not I bid
[Page 215]
you enquire where his Grace lives, and if you happen to see—
Jon. Ods bodickins! I remember it every word now! and the whelp is to be call'd by the Town [50]   cryer, just as one would call any thing that is lost.
Roy. Yes yes, go about it speedily (Exit Jon. ) Now in the first place, my good Humphry, I must see after the heiress I told you of, and it is a business, which requires a great deal of management too; for— Re-enter Jonathan , scratching his head. Damn that dunder-headed fool! here he is again.
Jon. Your honour wont be angry now, but hang me, if I can tell whether I am to take that there trunk, to the coach, or the waggon.
Roy. Take it to the coach—no, no, to the waggon —yes, yes, I should have said—pest take it! carry it where thou wilt, fool, and plague me no more about it. (Exit Jon. ) one might as well give directions to a horse-block. Now, as I was saying, Humphry, this requires a great deal of management; for if the lady dont like me, she may happen to like my son: so I must feel my way a little, before I speak directly to the purpose.
Humph. Ay, your honour is always feeling your way.
Roy. And as for the Duke, I will ply him as close as I can with solicitations in the mean time, without altogether stating my request; for if I get
[Page 216]
the lady, George shall have the office, and if he [75]   gets the lady, I shall have the office. So we shall have two chances in our favour both ways, my good Humphry.
Humph. Belike, sir, if we were to take but one business in hand at a time, we might come better off at the long run.
Roy. O! thou hast no head for business, Humphry: thou hast no genius for business, my good Humphry. (smiling conceitedly.)
Humph. Why, for certain your honour has a marvellous deal of wit, but I dont know how it is, nothing that we take in hand ever comes to any good; and what provokes me, more than all the rest, is, that the more pains we take about it, the worse it always succeeds.
Roy. Humph, we can't guard against every cross accident.
Humph. To be sure sir, cross accidents will happen to every body, but certes! we have] more than our own share of them.
Roy. Well, dont trouble yourself about it: I have head enough to manage my own affairs, and more than my own too. Why, my lord Slumber can't even grant a new lease, nor imprison a vagabond for poaching, without my advice and direction: [100]   did I not manage all Mr. Harebrain's election for him; and, but for one of those cursed accidents or two, had brought him in for his Borough, as neatly as my glove; nay, if his Grace and I get into good understanding together, there is no
[Page 217]
knowing, but I may have affairs of the nation upon my hands; ha, ha, ha! poor Humphry, thou hast no comprehension of all this: thou think'st me a very wonderful man, dost thou not?
Humph. I must own I do sometimes marvel at your honour.
Enter Mr. Withrington . Roy. Ha! how do you do, my dear cousin! I hope I have the happiness of seeing you in good health; I am heartily rejoiced to see you, my very good sir. (Shaking him heartily by the hand.)
With. I thank you, sir, you are welcome to Bath, I did not expect the pleasure of seeing you here.
Roy. Why, my dear worthy sir, I am a man of so much business, so toss'd about, so harass'd with a multiplicity of affairs, that I protest, I can't tell myself one day, what part of the world I shall be in the next.
With. You give yourself a great deal of trouble, Mr. Royston.
Roy. [125]   O! hang it! I never spare myself: I must work, to make others work, cousin Withrington; I have got a world of new alterations, going on at Royston-hall; if you would take a trip down to see them.
With. I am no great traveller, sir.
Roy. I have plough'd up the bowling-green, and cut down the elm-trees; I have built new
[Page 218]
stables, and fill'd up the horse pond; I have dug up the orchard, and pull'd down the old fruit wall, where that odd little temple used to stand.
With. And is the little temple pull'd down too? pray, what has become of your Vicar's sister, Mrs. Mary? we drunk tea with her there, I remember, is she married yet? she was a very modest looking gentlewoman.
Roy. So you remember her too; well I have pull'd down every foot of it, and built a new carthouse with the bricks.—Good commodious stalls for thirty horses, cousin Withrington, they beat Sir John Houndly's all to nothing; it is as clever, a well constructed building as any in the country.
With. Has Sir John built a new house in the country.
Roy. No, no, the stables I say.
With. [150]   O you are talking of the stables again.
Roy. But when I get the new addition to the mansion-house, finish'd, that will be the grand improvement; the best carpenters' work in the country, my dear sir, all well season'd timber from Norway.
Humph. It is part of a disputed wreck, sir, and if the law suit about the right to it turns out in my master's favour, as it should do, it will be the cheapest built house in the county; O! let his honour alone for making a bargain.
With. So you have got a law suit on your hands, Mr. Royston? I hope you are not much addicted
[Page 219]
to this kind of amusement, you will find it a very expensive one.
Roy. Bless you, my good sir, I am the most peaceable creature in the world, but I will suffer no man to impose upon me.
With. (smiling.) But you suffer the women sometimes to do so, do you not?
Humph. No, nor the women neither, sir; for it was but t'other day that he prosecuted widow Gibson, for letting her chickens feed amongst his corn, and it was given in his honour's favour, as in right it should have been.
With. (archly.) [175]   And who was adjudged to pay the expences of court, Mr. Humphry?
Humph. Ay, to be sure, his honour was obliged to pay that.
With. (archly.) But the widow paid swingingly for it, I suppose.
Humph. Nay 'faith, after all, they but fined her in a sixpence; yet that always shew'd, you know, that she was in the wrong.
With. To be sure, Mr. Humphry, and the sixpence would indemnify your master for the costs of suit.
Humph. Nay, as a body may say, he might as well have let her alone, for any great matter he made of it that way; but it was very wrong in her, you know, sir, to let her hens go amongst his honour's corn, when she knew very well, she was too poor to make up the loss to his honour.
With. Say no more about it, my good Humphry,
[Page 220]
you have vindicated your master most ably, and I have no doubts at all in regard to the propriety of his conduct.
Humph. (very well pleased.) Ay, thank god, I do sometimes make shift in my poor way to edge in a word for his honour.
Roy. (not so well pleased.) [200]   Thou art strangely given to prating this morning. (to Humph.) By the bye, cousin Withrington, I must consult you about my application to his Grace.
Humph. (aside to Withrington, pulling him by the sleeve.) You forget to ask for the lady, sir.
With. (turning round.) What did you say of his Grace?
Roy. No, no, I should—I meant—did I not say the gracious young lady your niece; I hope she is well?
With. (smiling.) She is very well; you shall go home with me, and visit her.
Roy. I am infinitely obliged to you, my worthy good sir, I shall attend you with the greatest pleasure; some ladies have no dislike to a good looking gentleman-like man, although he may be past the bloom of his youth, cousin? however young men do oftener carry the day, I believe, my son George is a good likely fellow, I expect him in Bath every hour, I shall have the honour of following you, my dear sir. Remember my orders Humphry.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 221]
Enter Harwood hastily, looking round as if he sought some one, and was disappointed. Har. (alone.) He is gone, I have miss'd the good uncle of Agnes—what is the matter with me now, that the sound of an old man's voice should agitate [225]   me thus? did I not feel it was the sound of something which belong'd to her? in faith! I believe, if her kitten was to mew, I should hasten to hold some intercourse with it.—I can stay in this cursed house no longer, and when I do go out, there is but one way these legs of mine will carry me, the alley which leads to her dwelling—Well, well, I have been but six times there to-day already; I may have a chance of seeing her at last—I'll run after the old gentleman even now—what a delightful witch it is!
                                         [ Exit hastily. SCENE II. Withrington's house. Agnes and Mariane , discovered, Mariane reading a letter, and Agnes looking earnestly and gladly in her face. Ag. My friend Edward is well, I see; pray what does the traveller say for himself?
Mar. (putting up the letter.) You shall read it all by and by, every thing that is pleasant and kind.
Ag. Heaven prosper you both! you are happier than I am with all my fortune, Mariane, you have a right true lover.
Mar. And so have you, Agnes, my Harwood will
[Page 222]
bear the trial: I have watch'd him closely, and I will venture my word upon him.
Ag. (taking her in her arms.) Now if thou art not deceiv'd, thou art the dearest sweet cousin on earth! (Pausing and looking seriously.) Ah no! it cannot be! I am but an ordinary looking girl, as my uncle says; (with vivacity;) I would it were so!
Enter Servant . Ser. Sir Loftus Prettyman and Mr. Opal.
Mar. I am at home. (Exit Servant .) I can't entertain these fools till I have put up my letter: do you receive them, I will soon return.
                                         [Exit. Enter Sir Loftus and Opal dress'd pretty much alike. Sir Loftus makes a haughty distant bow to Agnes , and Opal makes another very like it. Ag. Have the goodness to be seated, sir. (to Sir Loftus) Pray, sir, (to Opal, making a courteous motion as if she wish'd them to sit down.) Miss Withrington will be here immediately. (Sir Loftus makes a slight bow without speaking; Opal does the same, and both saunter about with their hats in their hands.)
Ag. I hope you had a pleasant walk after we [25]   left you, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. (Looking affectedly, as if he did not understand her.) I beg pardon—O! you were along with Miss Withrington. (Mumbling something which is not heard.)

[Page 223]
Ag. to Op. You are fond of that walk, Mr. Opal, I think I have seen you there frequently.
Op. Ma'am you are very— (mumbling something which is not heard, in the same manner with Sir Loftus, but still more absurd.) I do sometimes walk— (mumbling again.)
Ag. to Sir Loft. The country is delightful round Bath.
Sir Loft. Ma'am!
Ag. Dont you think so, Mr. Opal?
Op. 'Pon honour I never attended to it. (A long pause, Sir Loftus and Opal strut about conceitedly. Enter Mariane, and both of them run up to her at once, with great alacrity and satisfaction.)
Sir Loft. I hope I see Miss Withrington entirely recovered from the fatigues of the morning?
Mar. Pretty well, after the fatigue of dressing too, which is a great deal worse, Sir Loftus. (carelessly.)
Op. For the ball, I presume?
Sir Loft. I am delighted—
Mar. (addressing herself to Agnes, without attending to him.) Do you know what a provoking mistake my milliner has made?
Ag. I dont know.
Sir Loft. I hope madam—
Mar. to Ag. She has made up my whole suit of [50]   trimmings with the colour of all others I dislike.
Op. This is very provoking, indeed I would—
Mar. (Still speaking to Ag. without attending to them.)
[Page 224]
And she has sent home my petticoat all patch'd over with scraps of gold foil, like a mayday dress for a chimney-sweeper.
Sir Loft. (Thrusting in his face near Mariane, and endeavouring to be attended to.) A very good comparison, ha, ha!
Op. (Thrusting in his face at the other side of her.) Very good indeed, ha, ha, ha!
Mar. (Still speaking to Agnes, who winks at her without attending to them.) I'll say nothing about it but never employ her again,
Sir Loft. (going round to her other ear, and making another attempt.) I am delighted, Miss Withrington.
Mar. (carelessly.) Are you, Sir Loftus? (To Agnes.) I have broken my fan, pray put it by with your own, my dear Agnes! (Exit Agnes into the adjoining room, and Sir Loftus gives Opal a significant look, upon which he retires to the bottom of the stage, and, after sauntering a little there, Exit .)
Sir Loft. (seeming a little piqued.) If you would have done me the honour to hear me, Ma'am, I should have said, I am delighted to see you dress'd, as I hope I may presume from it, you intend going to the ball to-night.
Mar. Indeed I am too capricious to know whether I do or not; do you think it will be pleasant?
Sir Loft. Very pleasant, if the devotions of a thousand admirers can make it so.
Mar. O! the devotions of a thousand admirers,
[Page 225]
[75]   are like the good will of every body, one steady friendship is worth it all.
Sir Loft. From which may I infer that one faithful adorer, in your eyes, outvalues all the thousand? (Affecting to be tender.) Ah! so would I have Miss Withrington to believe! and if that can be any inducement, she will find such a one there, most happy to attend her.
Mar. Will she? I wonder who this may be: what kind of man is he pray?
Sir Loft. (With a conceited simper, at the same time in a pompous manner.) Perhaps it will not be boasting too much to say, he is a man of fashion, and of some little consequence in the world.
Mar. Handsome and accomplish'd too, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. I must not presume, ma'am, to boast of my accomplishments.
Mar. (Affecting a look of disappointment.) O! lud! so it is yourself after all! I have not so much penetration as I thought. (Yawning twice very wide.) Bless me! what makes me yawn so? I forgot to visit my old woman, who sells the cakes, this morning that must be it. (Yawning again.) Do you love gingerbread, Sir Loftus? (Sir Loftus bites his lip, and struts proudly away to the other side of the stage, whilst Agnes peeps from the closet, and makes signs of encouragement to Mariane.)
Mar. Well, after all, I believe, it will be pleasant [100]   enough to go to the ball, with such an accomplish'd attendant.

[Page 226]
Sir Loft. (Taking encouragement, and smothering his pride.) Are you so obliging, Miss Withrington? will you permit me to have the happiness of attending you?
Mar. If you'll promise to make it very agreeable to me; you are fond of dancing, I suppose?
Sir Loft. I'll do any thing you desire me, but why throw away time so precious in the rough familiar exercise of dancing? is there not something more distinguished, more refined, in enjoying the conversation of those we love?
Mar. In the middle of a crowd, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. What is that crowd to us? we have nothing to do but to despise it, whilst they stare upon us with vulgar admiration, we shall talk together, smile together, attend only to each other, like beings of a superiour order.
Mar. O! that will be delightful! but dont you think we may just peep slyly over our shoulder now and then, to see whether they are admiring us? (Sir Loftus bites his lips again, and struts to the bottom of the stage, whilst Agnes peeps out again from the closet, and makes signs to Mariane.)
Mar. (Carelessly pulling a small case from her pocket.) Are not these handsome brilliants, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. (Very much struck with the sparkling of the diamonds, but pretending not to look at them.) Upon my word, ma'am, I am no judge of trinkets.
Mar. [125]   They are clumsily set, I shall give them to my cousin.

[Page 227]
Sir Loft. (Forgetting himself.) Why, ma'am, do you seriously mean—They are of a most incomparable water.
Mar. (archly.) I thought you had not attended to them.
Sir Loft. (tenderly.) It is impossible in the presence of Miss Withrington, to think of any thing but the cruelty with which she imposes silence on a heart which adores her.
Mar. Nay, you entirely mistake me, Sir Loftus, I am ready to hear you with the greatest good nature imaginable.
Sir Loft. It is a theme, perhaps, on which my tongue would too long dwell.
Mar. O! not at all, I have leisure, and a great deal of patience at present, I beg you would by no means hurry yourself.
Sir Loft. (After a pause, looking foolish and embarrassed.) Few words, perhaps, will better suit the energy of passion.
Mar. Just as you please, Sir Loftus, if you chuse to say it in few words I am very well satisfied. (Another pause. Sir Loftus very much embarrassed.)
Enter Withrington and Harwood , and Sir Loftus seems very much relieved. Sir Loft. (aside) Heaven be praised! they are [150]   come.
Mar. to With. I thought you were to have brought Mr. Royston with you.
With. He left us at a shop by the way, to enquire
[Page 228]
the price of turnip seed; but he will be here by-and-by, if a hundred other things do not prevent him. (Bows to Sir Loftus; then turns to Harwood, and speaks as if he resumed a conversation which had just been broken off, whilst Sir Loftus and Mariane retire to the bottom of the stage.) I perfectly agree with you, Mr Harwood, that the study and preparation requisite for your profession is not altogether a dry treasuring up of facts in the memory, as many of your young students conceive: he who pleads the cause of man before fellow-men, must know what is in the heart of man as well as what is in the book of records, and what study is there in nature so noble, so interesting as this?
Har. But the most pleasing part of our task, my good sir, is not the least difficult. Where application only is wanting I shall not be left behind, for I am not without ambition, though the younger son of a family by no means affluent; and I have a widow mother whose hopes of seeing me respectable, must not be disappointed. I assure you there is nothing—
                                         (Listening.) With. Go on, Mr. Harwood, I have great pleasure [175]   in hearing you.
Har. I thought I heard a door move.
With. It is Agnes in the next room, I dare say, she is always making a noise.
Har. In the next room!
With. But you was going to assure me—Have the goodness to proceed.
Har. I was going to say—I rather think I said— I am sure—
                                         (Listening again.)
[Page 229]
With. Poo! there is no body there.
Har. Well, I said—I think I told you—In faith, my good sir, I will tell you honestly, I have forgot what I meant to say.
With. No matter, you will remember it again. Ha, ha, ha! it puts me in mind of a little accident which happened to myself when I was in Lincoln's Inn. Two or three of us met one evening, to be a little cheerful together, and— (Whilst Withrington begins his story, Agnes enters softly from the adjoining closet unperceived; but Harwood on seeing her, runs eagerly up to her, leaving Withrington astonished, in the middle of his discourse.)
Har. to Ag. Ha! after so many false alarms, you steal upon us at last like a little thief.
Ag. And I steal something very good from you too, if you lose my uncle's story by this interruption; for I know by his face he was telling one.
With. Raillery is not always well-timed, Miss Agnes Withrington.
Ag. [200]   Nay, do not be cross with us, sir. Mr. Harwood knew it was too good to be spent upon one pair of ears, so he calls in another to partake.
With. Get along, baggage.
Ag. So I will, uncle; for I know that only means with you that I should perk myself up by your elbow.
With. Well, two or three of us young fellows were met—did I not say—
Ag. At Lincoln's Inn. (Withrington hesitates.)
Har. She has named it, sir.

[Page 230]
With. I know well enough it was there. And if I remember well, George Buckner was one of us. (Agnes gives a gentle hem to suppress a cough.)
Har. (eagerly.) You was going to speak, Miss Withrington?
Ag. No, indeed, I was not.
With. Well, George Buckner and two three more of us—We were in a very pleasant humour that night— (Agnes making a slight motion of her hand to fasten some pin in her dress.)
Har. (eagerly.) Do you not want something? (To Agnes.)
Ag. No, I thank you, I want nothing.
With. (Half amused, half peevish.) Nay, say what you please to one another, for my story is [225]   ended.
Har. My dear sir, we are perfectly attentive.
Ag. Now, pray, uncle!
With. to Ag. Now pray hold thy tongue. I forgot, I must consult the Court Calendar on Royston's account. (Goes to a table and takes up a red book, which he turns over.)
Ag. to Har. How could you do so to my uncle? I would not have interrupted him for the world.
Har. Ay, chide me well: I dearly love to be chidden.
Ag. Do not invite me to it. I am said to have a very good gift that way, and you would soon have too much of it, I believe.
Har. O no! I would come every hour to be chidden!

[Page 231]
Ag. And take it meekly too?
Har. Nay, I would have my revenge: I should call you scolding Agnes, and little Agnes, and my little Agnes.
Ag. You forget my dignity, Mr Harwood.
Har. Oh! you put all dignity out of countenance! The great Mogul himself would forget his own in your presence.
Ag. Am I, as the good folks say, such a very humbling sight? But they are going to the garden: [250]   I am resolved to be one of the party. (As she goes to join Sir Loftus and Mariane, who open a glass door leading to the garden, Harwood goes before, walking backwards, and his face turned to her.) You will break your pate presently, if you walk with that retrograde step, like a dancing-master giving me a lesson. Do you think I shall follow you as if you had the fiddle in your hand?
Har. Ah, Miss Withrington! it is you who have got the fiddle, and I who must follow.
                                         [ Exeunt into the garden. Re-enter Sir Loftus from the Garden, looking about for his hat. Sir Loft. O! here it is.
Enter Opal . Op. What, here alone?
Sir Loft. She is in the garden, I shall join her immediately.
Op. All goes on well, I suppose?

[Page 232]
Sir Loft. Why, I dont know how it is—nobody hears us? (Looking round.) I dont know how it is, but she does not seem to comprehend perfectly in what light I am regarded by the world; that is to say, by that part of it which deserves to be called so.
Op. No! that is strange enough.
Sir Loft. Upon my honour, she treats me with as much careless familiarity as if I were some plain neighbour's son in the country.
Op. 'Pon honour, this is very strange.
Sir Loft. I am not without hopes of succeeding; but I will confess to you, I wish she would change [275]   her manner of behaving to me. On the word of a gentleman, it is shocking! Suppose you were to give her a hint of the consequence I am honoured with in the fashionable circles, that she may just have an idea of the respect which is paid by every well-bred person—You understand me, Opal?
Op. O! perfectly. I shall give her to know that men like us, my dear friend, are accustomed to be looked upon as a class of superiour beings.
Sir Loft. (not quite satisfied.) I dont know— Suppose you were to leave out all mention of yourself—Your own merit could not fail to be inferred.
Op. Well, I shall do so.
Sir Loft. Let us go the garden.                                          [Exeunt. Enter Miss Eston , speaking as she enters. I have been all over the town, and here am I at
[Page 233]
last quite tired to death. How do you?— (Looking round.) O la! there is nobody here. Mr. Opal is gone too. I'll wait till their return. (Takes up a book, then looks at herself in the glass, then takes up the book again. Yawning.) 'Tis all about the imagination, and the understanding, and I dont know what—I dare say it is good enough to read of a Sunday. (Yawns, and lays it down.) O la! I wish they would come.
Enter Royston , and takes Miss Eston for Miss Withrington . Roys. Madam, I have the honour to be your very humble servant. I hoped to have been here [300]   sooner, but I have been so overwhelmed with a multiplicity of affairs; and you know, madam, when that is the case—
Est. (Taking the word out of his mouth.) One is never master of one's time for a moment. I'm sure I have been all over the town this morning, looking after a hundred things; till my head has been put into such a confusion! La, ma'am! said my millener, do take some lavender drops, you look so pale. Why, says I, I dont much like to take them, Mrs. Trollop, they a'nt always good.
Roys. No more they are, ma'am, you are very right; and if a silly fellow, I know, had taken my advice last year, and bought up the lavender drops, he would have made—
Est. (Taking the word from him again.) A very good fortune, I dare say. But people never will
[Page 234]
take advice, which is very foolish in them, to be sure. Now I always take—
Roys. Be so good as to hear me, ma'am.
Est. Certainly, sir; For I always say if they give me advice it is for my good, and why should not I take it?
Roys. (Edging in his word as fast as he can.) And the damn'd foolish fellow too! I once saved him from being cheated in a horse; and—
Est. [325]   La! there are such cheats! a friend of mine bought a little lap-dog the other day—
Roys. But the horse, madam, was—
Est. Not worth a guinea, I dare say. Why they had the impudence to palm it on my friend.
Both speaking together. Est. As a pretty little dog, which had been bred
Roys. It was a good mettled horse, and might
E. up for a lady of quality, and when she had
R. have passed as a good purchase at the money,
E. just made a cushion for it at the foot of her
R. but on looking his fore feet— (Stops short, and lets her go on.) own bed, she found it was all over mangy. I'm sure I would rather have a plain wholesome cat, than the prettiest mangy dog in the kingdom.
Roys. Certainly, ma'am. And I assure you the horse—for says I to the groom—
Both speaking together. Est. O! I dare say it was—and who would

[Page 235]
Roys. What is the matter with this pastern,
E. have suspected that a dog bred up on pur-
R. Thomas? it looks as if it were rubbed— (Stops short again, and looks at her with astonishment as she goes on talking.)
E. pose for a lady of quality, should be all over so? nasty creature! It had spots upon its back as large as my watch. (Taking up her watch.) O la! I am half an hour after my time. My mantuamaker is waiting for me. Good morning, sir.
                                         [ Exit , hastily. Roys. (Looking after her.) [350]   Clack, clack, clack, clack! What a devil of a tongue she has got! 'Faith! George shall have her, and I'll e'en ask the place for myself. (Looking out.) But there is company in the garden! I'll go and join them.
                                         [ Exit to the garden. ACT III. SCENE I. Mr. Witrington's house. A loud laughing without. Enter Royston , in a great rage. Roys. Ay, ay, laugh away, laugh away, madam, you'll weep by-and-by, mayhap. (Pauses and listens, laughing still heard.) What an infernal noise the jade makes. I wish she had a peck of chaff in her mouth, I am sure it is wide enough to hold it.

[Page 236]
Enter Humphry . Humph. I have been seeking your honour every where—Lord, sir! I have something to tell you.
Roys. Confound your tales! dont trouble me with a parcel of nonsense.
Humph. (Staring at him, and hearing the laughing without.) For certain, your honour, there's somebody in this house merrier than you or I.
Roys. Damn you, sir! how do you know I am not merry? Go home, and do what I ordered you directly. If that fellow Jonathan is not in the way, I'll horse-whip him within an inch of his life. Begone, I say, why do you stand staring at me, like a madman?
                                         [Exeunt. Enter Mariane and Agnes , by opposite sides. Mar. (holding her sides.) Oh how my poor sides ach! I shan't be able to laugh again for a month.
Ag. You have got rid of one lover who will scarcely attempt you a second time. I have met him hurrying through the hall, and muttering to himself like a madman. It is not your refusal of his son that has so roused him.
Mar. [25]   No, no, he began his courtship in a doubtful way, as if he would recommend a gay young husband to my choice, but a sly compliment to agreeable men of a middle age, brought him soon to speak plainly for himself.
Ag. But how did you provoke him so?

[Page 237]
Mar. I will tell you another time. It is later than I thought. (Looking at her watch.)
Ag. Dont go yet. How stands it with you and a certain gentleman I recommended to your notice?
Mar. O! he does not know whether I am tall or short, brown or fair, foolish or sensible, after all the pains I have taken with him: he has eyes, ears, and understanding, for nobody but you, Agnes, and I will attempt him no more. He spoke to me once with animation in his countenance, and I turned round to listen to him eagerly, but it was only to repeat to me something you had just said, which, to deal plainly with you, had not much wit in it neither. I dont know how it is, he seemed to me at first a pleasanter man than he proves to be.
Ag. Oh! say not so, Mariane! he proves to be most admirable!
Mar. Well, be it so, he cannot prove better [50]   than I wish him to do, and I can make up my list without him. I have a love letter from an Irish baronet in my pocket, and Opal will declare himself presently.—I thought once he meant only to plead for his friend, but I would not let him off so, for I know he is a mercenary creature. I have flattered him a little at the expence of Sir Loftus, and I hope ere long to see him set up for a great man upon his own bottom.
Ag. So it was only to repeat to you something that I had been saying?
Mar. Ha! you are thinking of this still. I believe
[Page 238]
indeed he sets down every turn of your eye in his memory, and acts it all over in secret.
Ag. Do you think so? give me your hand, my dear Mariane, you are a very good cousin to me— Marks every turn of mine eye! I am not quite such an ordinary girl as my uncle says—My complexion is as good as your own, Mariane, if it were not a little sun-burnt. (Mariane smiles.) Yes, smile at my vanity as you please, for what makes me vain, makes me so good humoured too, that I will forgive you. But here comes uncle. (Skipping as she goes to meet him.) O! I am light as an air-ball! (Enter Mr Withrington.) My dear sir, how [75]   long you have been away from us this morning! I am delighted to see you so pleased and so happy.
With. (with a very sour face.) You are mistaken, young lady, I am not so pleased as you think.
Ag. O no, sir! you are very good humoured. Is'nt he, Mariane?
With. But I say I am in very bad humour. Get along with your foolery!
Ag. Is it really so? Let me look in your face, uncle? To be sure your brows are a little knit, and your eyes a little gloomy, but poo! that is nothing to be called bad humour; if I could not contrive to look crabbeder than all this comes to, I would never pretend to be ill humoured in my life. (Mariane and Agnes take him by the hands and begin to play with him.)
With. No, no, young ladies, I am not in a
[Page 239]
mood to be played with. I can't approve of every farce you please to play off in my family, nor to have my relations affronted, and driven from my house for your entertainment.
Mar. Indeed, sir, I treated Royston better than he deserved, for he would not let me have time to give a civil denial, but ran on planning settlements and jointures, and a hundred things besides; [100]   I could just get in my word to stop his career with a flat refusal, as he was about to provide for our descendants of the third generation. O! if you had seen his face then, uncle!
With. I know very well how you have treated him.
Ag. Dont be angry, sir. What does a man like Royston care for a refusal? he is only angry that he can't take the law of her for laughing at him.
With. Let this be as it may, I dont chuse to have my house in a perpetual bustle from morning till night, with your plots and your pastimes. There is no more order nor distinction kept up in my house, than if it were a cabin in Kamschaika, and common to a whole tribe. I can't set my nose into a room of it but I find some visitor, or showman, or millener's apprentice, loitering about: my best books are cast upon footstools and window-seats, and my library is littered over with work-bags: dogs, cats, and kittens, take possession of every chair, and refuse to be disturbed: kitchen wenches flaunt up stairs with their new top-knots
[Page 240]
on, to look at themselves in the pier glasses; and the very beggar children go hopping about my hall, [125]   with their half-eaten scraps in their hands, as though it were the entry to a work-house.
Ag. (Clapping his shoulder gently.) Now dont be impatient, my dear sir, and every thing shall be put into such excellent order as shall delight you to behold. And as for the beggar children, if any of them dare but to set their noses within the door, I'll—What shall I do with them, sir? (Pauses and looks in his face, which begins to relent.) I believe we must e'en give them a little pudding after all. (Both take his hands and coax him.)
With. Come, come, off hands and let me sit down. I am tired of this.
Ag. Yes, uncle, and here is one seat, you see, with no cat upon it. (Withrington sits down, and Agnes takes a little stool and sits down at his feet, curling her nose as she looks up to him, and making a good humoured face.)
With. Well, it may be pleasant enough, girls, but allow me to say all this playing, and laughing, and hoidening about is not gentlewomanlike, nay, I might say, is not maidenly. A high bred elegant woman is a creature which man approaches with awe and respect; but nobody would think of accosting you with such impressions, any more than if your were a couple of young female tinkers.
Ag. Dont distress yourself about this, sir, we [150]   shall get the men to bow to us, and tremble before
[Page 241]
us too, as well as e'er a hoop-petticoat or long ruffles of them all.
With. Tremble before you! ha, ha, ha! (to Agnes) Who would tremble before thee dost thou think?
Ag. No despicable man perhaps: What think you of your favourite, Harwood?
With. Poo, poo, poo! he is pleased with thee as an amusing and good natured creature, and thou thinkest he is in love with thee, forsooth.
Ag. A good natured creature! he shall think me a vixen and be pleased with me.
With. No, no, not quite so far gone, I believe.
Ag. I'll bet you two hundred pounds that it is so. If I win you shall pay it to Mariane for wedding trinkets, and if you win you may build a couple of alms-houses.
With. Well, be it so. We shall see, we shall see.
Mar. Indeed we shall see you lose your bet, uncle.
With. to Mar. Yes, baggage, I shall have your prayers against me I know.
Enter Servant , and announces Mr. Opal. Enter Opal . Op. to Mar. I hope I have the pleasure of seeing [175]   Miss Withrington well this morning. (Bows distantly to Withrington, and still more so to Agnes, after the manner of Sir Loftus.)

[Page 242]
With. Your servant, sir.
Mar. to Op. How did you like the ball last night? There was a gay, genteel looking company.
Op. (With affected superiority.) Excepting Lord Saunter, and Lord Poorly, and Sir Loftus, and one or two more of us, I did not know a soul in the room.
With. There were some pretty girls there, Mr. Opal?
Op. I am very glad to hear it, 'pon honour. I did not— (Mumbling.)
With. (aside.) Affected puppy, I can't bear to look at him.
                                         [Exit. Mar. (Assuming a gayer air as Withrington goes out.) You will soon have a new beau to enrich your circle, Mr. Opal, the handsome and accomplished Colonel Beaumont. He is just returned from abroad, and is now quite the fashion at court. (To Agnes.) Dont you think Mr. Opal resembles him?
Ag. O! very much indeed.
Op. (Bowing very graciously.) Does he not resemble Sir Loftus too? I mean in his air and his manner.
Mar. O! not at all! That haughty coldness of [200]   his is quite old fashioned now; so unlike the affable frankness so much admired in the Colonel: you have seen him I presume?
Op. I have never had that honour.

[Page 243]
Mar. Then you will not be displeased at the likeness we have traced, when you do.
Op. (Relaxing from his dignity, and highly pleased.) The greatest pleasure of my life, ma'am, will be to resemble what pleases you. (Mariane tips Agnes the wink, and she retires to the bottom of the stage.)
Mar. You flatter me infinitely.
Op. Ah! call it not flattery, charming Miss Withrington! for now I will have the boldness to own to you frankly, I have been, since the first moment I beheld you, your most sincere, your most passionate admirer. Upon hon— (correcting himself) 'faith I have!
Mar. Nothing but my own want of merit can make me doubt of any thing Mr. Opal asserts upon his honour or his faith. (Turning and walking towards the bottom of the stage, whilst Opal follows her stalking in dumb show; then Agnes joins them, and they all come forward to the front.)
Ag. to Mar. How much that turn of his head puts me mind of the Colonel.
Mar. So it does, my Agnes. (To Opal.) Pray have the goodness to hold it so for a moment! There now, it is just the very thing. (Opal holds his head in a constrained ridiculous posture, and then makes a conceited bow.) His very manner of bowing too! one would swear it was the Colonel!
Ag. [225]   Yes, only the Colonel is more familiar, more easy in his carriage.
Op. O! Ma'am! I assure you I have formerly
[Page 244]
—It is my natural manner to be remarkably easy—But I— (pauses.)
Mar. Have never condescended to assume any other than your natural manner, I hope.
Op. O! not at all, I detest affectation; there is nothing I detest so much—But upon my soul! I can't tell how it is, I have been graver of late. I am, indeed, sometimes thoughtful.
Mar. O fye upon it! dont be so any more. It is quite old fashioned and ridiculous now. (To Agnes, winking at her.) Did you see my gloves any where about the room, cousin?
Op. I'll find them. (Goes to look for them with great briskness.—Servant announces Miss Eston.)
Op. Pest take her! I stared at her once in a mistake, and she has ogled and followed me ever since.
Enter Miss Eston , running up to Mariane and Agnes, and pretending not to see Opal, though she cannot help looking askance at him while she speaks. Est. O my dear creatures! you can't think how I have longed to see you. Mrs. Thomson kept me so long this morning, and you know she is an intolerable talker. Pretending to discover Opal) O! how do you do, Mr. Opal? I declare I did not observe you!
Op. (With a distant haughty bow.) [250]   I am obliged to you, ma'am.

[Page 245]
Est. I did see your figure, indeed, but I mistook it for Sir Loftus.
Op. (Correcting himself, and assuming a cheerful frank manner.) O ma'am! you are very obliging to observe me at all. I believe Prettyman and I may be nearly of the same height. (Looking at his watch.) I am beyond my appointment I see. Excuse me: I must hurry away.
                                         [ Exit , hastily. Est. (Looking after him with marks of disappointment.) I am very glad he is gone. He does so haunt me, and stare at me, I am quite tired of it. The first time I ever saw him, you remember how he looked me out of countenance. I was resolved before I came not to take notice of him.
Mar. So you knew you should find him here, then.
Est. O la! one dont know of a morning who one may meet; as likely him as any body else, you know. I really wonder now what crotchet he has taken in his head about me. Do you know, last night, before twilight, I peeped past the blind, and saw him walking with slow pensive steps, under my window.
Mar. Well, what happened then?
Est. I drew in my head, you may be sure; but [275]   a little while after, I peeped out again, and, do you know, I saw him come out of the perfumer's shop, just opposite to my dressing-room, where he had been all the while.
Mar. Very well, and what happened next?
Est. La! nothing more. But was it not very
[Page 246]
odd? What should he be doing all that time in that little paltry shop? The great shop near the Circus is the place where every body buys perfumery.
Ag. No, there is nothing very odd in Mr. Opal's buying perfumes at a very paltry shop, where he might see and be seen by a very pretty lady.
Est. (With her face brightning up.) Do you think so? O no! you dont?
Ag. To be sure I do. But I know what is very strange.
Est. O la! dear creature! What is it?
Ag. He bought his perfumes there before you came, when there was no such inducement. Is not that very odd? (Eston pauses, and looks silly.)
Enter Mr. Withrington , but upon perceiving Eston, bows and retreats again. Est. (Recovering herself.) Ha! how do you do, Mr. Withrington? I have just seen your friend, Lady Fade. Poor dear soul! she says—
With. I am sorry, ma'am, it is not in my power [300]   at present—I am in a hurry, I have an appointment. Your servant, ma'am.
                                         [Exit. Est. Well, now this is very odd! Wherever I go, I find all the men just going out to some appointment. O, I forgot to tell you, Mrs. Thomson has put a new border to her drawing room, just like the one up stairs, Has it not a dark blue ground? (To Mariane.)

[Page 247]
Mar. I'm sure I cannot tell, let us go up stairs and see.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE II. Before Mr. Withrington's House. Enter Harwood. Well, here I am again, yet devil take me if I can muster up resolution enough to take the knocker in my hand! What a fool was I to call twice this morning! for with what face can I now visit her again? The old gentleman will look strangely at me; the fine heiress her cousin will stare at me; nay, the very servants begin already to smile with impertinent significance, as I enquire with conscious foolishness, if the ladies are at home. Then Agnes herself will look so drolly at me—Ah! but she will look so pleasantly too!— 'Faith! I'll e'en go. (Goes to the door, puts his hand up to the knocker, stops short, and turns from it again. Pauses.) What a fool am I, to stand thinking about it here! If I were but fairly in the room with her, and the first salutation over, I should not care if the devil himself made faces at me. Oh no! every body is good humoured, every thing is happy that is near her! the kitten who plays by her side takes hold of her gown unchidden. How pleasant it is to love what is so blessed! I would hate the fairest womsn on earth if she were not of a sweet temper. Come away, come away, every thing favours me here, but my own foolish fancies.

[Page 248]
(As he goes to the door again, it opens, and enters from the house, Betty, crying, with a bundle in her hand.) Bet. O dear me! O dear me!
Har. [25]   What is the matter with you, my good girl?
Bet. I'm sure it was not my fault, and she has abused me worser than a heathen.
Har. That is hard indeed.
Bet. Indeed it is, sir; and all for a little nasty essence bottle, which was little better than a genteel kind of a stink at the best, and I am sure I did but take out the stopper to smell to it, when it came to pieces in my hand like an egg shell; if bottles will break, how can I help it; but la! sir, there is no speaking reason to my mistress, she is as furious and as ill tempered as a dragon.
Har. Dont distress yourself, Miss Agnes Withrington will make amends to you for the severity of your mistress.
Bet. She truly! she is my mistress herself, and she has abused me, O dear me—If it had been Miss Withrington, she would not have said a word to me, but Miss Agnes is so cross, and so ill natured, there is no living in the house with her.
Har. Girl, you are beside yourself.
Bet. No, sir, god be praised! but she is beside herself, I believe. Does she think I am going to live in her service to be call'd names so, and compared [50]   to a blackamoor too? if I had been waiting maid to the queen, she would not have compared
[Page 249]
me to a blackamoor, and will I take such usage from her? what do I care for her cast gowns.
Har. Well, but she is liberal to you?
Bet. She liberal! she'll keep every thing that is worth keeping to herself, I warrant; and lord pity those who are bound to live with her! I'll seek out a new place for myself, and let the devil, if he will, wait upon her next, in the shape of blackamoor; they will be fit company for one another, and if he gets the better of her for scolding, he is a better devil than I take him for: and I am sure, sir, if you were to see her—
Har. Get along! get along! your are too passionate yourself, to be credited.
Bet. I know what I know, I dont care what no body says, no more I do; I know who to complain to.
                                         [ Exit , grumbling. Har. (alone.) What a malicious toad it is! I dare say now, she has done something very provoking, I cannot bear these pert chamber-maids, the very sight of them is offensive to me.
Enter Jonathan . Jon. Good evening to your honour, can you tell me if Mr. Withrington be at home? for as how, [75]   my master has sent me with a message to him.
Har. (Impatiently.) Go to the house and enquire, I know nothing about it. (Jonathan goes into the house.)
Har. (Alone, after musing some time.) That girl has put me out of all heart though, with her
[Page 250]
cursed stories,—No, no, it cannot be—it is impossible!
Re-enter Jonathan from the house, scratching his head, and looking behind. Jon. 'Faith there is hot work going on amongst them! thank heaven I am out again!
Har. What do you mean?
Jon. 'Faith! that little lady, in that there house, is the best hand at a scold, saving Mary Macmurrock, my wife's mother, that ever my too blessed eyes looked upon, lord sir! (going nearer him) her tongue goes ting, ting, ting, as shrill as the bell of any pieman, and then, sir, (going nearer him) her two eyes look out of her head, as though they were a couple of glow-worms, and then sir, he, he, he! (laughing, and going close up to him) she claps her little hands so, as if—
Har. Shut your fool's mouth and be damn'd to you! (Kicks Jonathan off the stage in a violent passion; then leans his back to a tree, and seems thoughtful for some time, and very much troubled.)
Enter Agnes from the house, with a stormy look on her face. Ag. So you are still loitering here, Harwood? you have been very much amused I suppose, with the conversation of those good folks, you have talked with.
Har. [100]   No, not much amused, madam, though
[Page 251]
somewhat astonished, I own; too much astonish'd indeed, to give it any credit.
Ag. O! it is true though, I have been very cross with the girl, and very cross with everybody, and if you dont clear up that dismal face of yours, I shall be cross with you too: what could possess you to stay so long under that chesnut-tree a little while ago, always appearing as if you were coming to the house, and always turning back again?
Har. (eagerly.) And is it possible, you were then looking at me, and observing my motions?
Ag. Indeed I was just going to open my window and beckon to you, when that creature broke my phial of sweet essence, and put me quite out of temper.
Har. Hang the stupid jade! I could—
Ag. So you are angry too? O! well done! we are fit company for one another, come along with me, come, come, (impatiently. As she turns to go something catches hold of her gown.) What is this? confounded thing! (Pulls away her gown in a passion, and tears it.)
Har. (aside.) Witch that she is, she should be beaten for her humours. I will not go with her.
Ag. (Looking behind.) [125]   So you wont go in with me? good evening to you then: we did want a fourth person to make up a party with us, but since you dont like it we shall send to Sir Loftus or Opal, or Sir Ulock O'Grady, or some other good creature; I dare say Sir Loftus will come.

[Page 252]
Har. (Half aside.) Cursed Coxcomb! If he sets his snout within the door, I'll pistol him.
Ag. (Overhearing him.) Ha! well said! you will make the best company in the world, come along, come along, (he follows her half unwillingly,) why dont you offer your arm here? dont you see how rough it is? (He offers his arm.) Poo, not that arm. (Offers her the other.) Poo, not so neither, on t'other side of me.
Har. What a humoursome creature you are! I have offer'd you two arms, and neither of them will do, do you think I have a third to offer you?
Ag. You are a simpleton, or you would have half a dozen at my service.
                                         [ Exeunt into the house. ACT IV. SCENE I. Harwood's Lodgings. He is discovered walking about with an irregular disturbed step, his hair and dress all neglected and in disorder; he comes forward to the front of the stage. Har. I have neither had peace nor sleep since I beheld her; O! that I had never known her! or know her only such as my first fond fancy conceived her!—I would my friend were come, I will open my heart to him, he perhaps will speak comfort to me, for surely that temper must be violent indeed, which generous affection cannot subdue;
[Page 253]
and she must be extravagant beyond all bounds of nature, who would ruin the fond husband who toils for her; no, no, nature makes not such, but when she sets her scowling mark upon them to warn us from our ruin. (Pauses, walks up and down, then comes forward again.) Insipid constitutions, good nature is a tiresome thing: passion subdued by reason is worth a score of it—and passion subdued by love?—O! that were better still! —yesterday, as I enter'd her door, I heard her name me to her cousin, with so much gentle softness in her voice, I blest her as she spoke.—Ah! if this were so, all might still be well; who would not struggle with the world, for such a creature as this— Ay, and I must struggle!—O! that this head of mine would give over thinking, but for one half hour! (Rings the bell.) Enter Thomas . [25]   What brings you here, Thomas?
Thom. Your bell rung, sir.
Har. Well, well, I did want something but I have forgot it. Bring me a glass of water. ( Exit Thomas. Harwood sits down by a small writing-table, and rests his head upon his hand. Re-enter Thomas, with the water.) You have made good haste, Thomas.
Thom. I did make good haste, sir, lest you should be impatient with me.
Har. I am sometimes impatient with you, then? I fear indeed I have been too often so of late;
[Page 254]
but you must not mind it, Thomas, I mean you no unkindness.
Thom. Lord love you, sir! I know that very well! a young gentleman who takes an old man into his service, because other gentlemen do not think him quick enough, nor smart enough for them, as your honour has taken me, can never mean to show him any unkindness, I know it well enough; I am only uneasy because I fear you are not so well of late.
Har. I thank you, Thomas, I am not very well— I am not ill neither, I shall be better. (Pauses.) I think I have heard you say, you were a soldier in your youth?
Thom. Yes, sir.
Har. [50]   And you had a wife too, a woman of fiery mettle, to bear about your napsack?
Thom. Yes, sir, my little stout spirity Jane; she had a devil of a temper, to be sure.
Har. Yet you loved her notwithstanding?
Thom. Yes, to be sure, I did, as it were, bear her some kindness.
Har. I'll be sworn you did!—and you would have been very sorry to have parted with her.
Thom. Why death parts the best of friends, sir: we lived but four years together.
Har. And so, your little spirity Jane was taken so soon away from you? Give me thy hand, my good Thomas. (Takes his hand and presses it.)
Thom. (Perceiving tears in his eyes.) Lord, sir! dont be so distress'd about it; she did die, to be
[Page 255]
sure, but truly, between you and I, although I did make a kind of whimpering at the first, I was not ill pleased afterwards to be rid of her; for, truly, sir, a man who has got an ill tempered wife, has but a dog's life of it at the best.—Will you have your glass of water, sir?
Har. (Looking at him with dissatisfaction.) No, no, take it away; I have told you a hundred times not to bring me that chalky water from the courtyard. [75]   (Turns away from him.)
Enter Colonel Hardy .— Harwood signs to Thomas, and he goes out. Har. My dear Colonel, this is kind; I am very glad to see you.
Col. It is so seldom that a young fellow has any inclination for the company of an old man, that I should feel myself vain of the summons you have sent me, were I not afraid, from this dishabille, my dear Harwood, that you are indisposed.
Har. You are very good; I am not indisposed. I have indeed been anxious—I rested indifferently last night—I hope I see you well.
Col. Very well, as you may guess from the speed I have made in coming to you. These legs do not always carry me so fast; but you have something particular to say to me.
Har. I am very sensible of your friendship.— Pray, Colonel, be seated!— (They sit down—a long pause.—Colonel Hardy, like one expecting to hear something; Harwood, like one who knows not how
[Page 256]
to begin.) —There are moments in a man's life, Colonel Hardy, when the advice of a friend is of the greatest value; particularly one, who has also been his father's friend.
Col. My heart very warmly claims both those relations to you, Harwood; and I shall be happy to advise you, as well as I am able.
Har. (After another pause.) I am about to [100]   commence a laborious profession.—The mind is naturally anxious.— (Pauses.)
Col. But you are too capable of exercising well that profession, to suffer much uneasiness.
Har. Many a man, with talents superiour to mine, has sunk beneath the burden.
Col. And many a man, with talents vastly inferiour to yours, has borne it up with credit.
Har. Ah! What avails the head with an estranged heart!
Col. You are disgusted, then, with your profession, and have, perhaps, conceived more favourably of mine? I am sorry for it: I hoped to see you make a figure at the bar; and your mother has long set her heart upon it.
Har. (With energy.) O, no! she must not! she shall not be disappointed!—Pardon me, my expressions have gone somewhat wide of my meaning.—I meant to have consulted you in regard to other difficulties.—
Col. And pardon me likewise, for interrupting you; but it appears to me, that an unlearned
[Page 257]
soldier is not a person to be consulted in these matters.
Har. It was not, altogether, of these matters [125]   I meant to speak—But, perhaps, we had better put it off for the present.
Col. No, no!
Har. Perhaps, we had better walk out a little way; we may talk with less restraint as we go.
Col. No, no, there are a thousand impertinent people about. Sit down again, and let me hear every thing you wish to say.
Har. (Pausing, hesitating, and much embarrassed.) There are certain attachments in which a man's heart may be so deeply interested—I would say so very—or rather I should say so strangely engaged, that— (hesitates and pauses.)
Col. O, here it is! I understand it now. But pray dont be so foolish about it, Harwood! You are in love?
Har. (Appearing relieved.) I thank you quickness, my dear Colonel, I fear it is somewhat so with me.
Col. And whence your fear? Not from the lady's cruelty?
Har. No, there is another bar in my way, which does, perhaps, too much depress my hopes of happiness.
Col. You have not been prudent enough to fall in love with an heiress?
Har. [150]   No, my dear sir, I have not.
Col. That is a great mistake, to be sure, Harwood;
[Page 258]
yet many a man has not advanced the less rapidly in his profession, for having a portionless wife to begin the world with. It is a spur to industry.
Har. (Looking pleased at him.) Such sentiments are what I expected from Colonel Hardy; and, were it not for female failings, there would be little risk in following them.—I dont know how to express it—I am perhaps too delicate in these matters—We ought not to expect a faultless woman.
Col. No, surely; and, if such a woman were to be found, she would be no fit companion for us.
Har. (Getting up, and pressing the Colonel's hand between his.) My dearest friend! your liberality and candour delight me!—I do, indeed, believe that many a man has lived very happily with a woman far from being faultless; and, after all, where is the great injury he sustains, if she should be a little violent and unreasonable?
Col. (Starting up from his seat.) Nay, heaven defend us from a violent woman; for that is the devil himself!— (Seeing Harwood's countenance change) —What is the matter with you, Harwood? She is not ill temper'd, I hope?
Har. (Hesitating.) [175]   Not—not absolutely so— She is of a very quick and lively disposition, and is apt to be too hasty and unguarded in her emotions. —I do not, perhaps, make myself completely understood.
Col. O! I understand you perfectly,—I have
[Page 259]
known ladies of this lively disposition, very hasty and unguarded too in their demands upon a man's pocket as well as his patience; but she may be of a prudent and economical turn. Is it so, Harwood?
Har. (Throwing himself into a chair very much distress'd.) I do not say it is, Colonel.
Col. (Putting his hand kindly upon his shoulder.) I am sorry to distress you so much, my dear friend, yet it must be so. I see how it is with you: pardon the freedom of friendship, but indeed an expensive and violent temper'd woman is not to be thought of: he who marries such a one forfeits all peace and happiness. Pluck up some noble courage, and renounce this unfortunate connexion.
Har. (Starting up.) Renounce it, Colonel Hardy! Is it from you I receive so hard, so unfeeling a request, who have suffered so much yourself from the remembrance of an early attachment? I thought to have been pitied by you.
Col. I was early chagrined with the want of promotion, and disappointed in my schemes of [200]   ambition, which gave my countenance something of a melancholy cast, I believe, and the ladies have been kind enough to attribute it to the effects of hopeless love; but how could you be such a ninny, my dear Harwood?
Har. I am sorry, sir, we have understood one another so imperfectly.
Col. Nay, nay, my young friend, do not carry
[Page 260]
yourself so distantly with me. You have sought a love-worn companion, and you have found a plain spoken friend. I am sorry to give you pain; deal more openly with me: when I know who this bewitching creature is, I shall, perhaps, judge more favourably of your passion.
Har. It is Miss Agnes Withrington.
Col. Cousin to Miss Withrington the heiress?
Har. Yes it is she. What have I said to amaze you?
Col. You amaze me, indeed!—That little— fogive me if I were almost to say,—plain looking girl! Friendship would sympathize in your feelings; but, pardon me, Harwood, you have lost your wits.
Har. I believe I have, Colonel, which must plead my pardon, likewise, for expecting this [225]   friendship from you.
Col. You distress me.
Har. I distress myself still more, by suffering so long the pain of this conversation.
Col. Let us end it, then, as soon as you please. When you are in a humour to listen to reason, I shall be happy to have the honour of seeing you.
Har. When I am in that humour, sir, I will not balk it so much as to intrude upon your time.
Col. Let me see you, then, when you are not in that humour, and I shall the more frequently have the pleasure of your company. (Both bow coldly. Exit , Colonel Hardy.)

[Page 261]
Har. (alone.) What a fool was I to send for this man!—A little plain looking girl! What do the people mean? They will drive me mad amongst them. Why does not the little witch wear high heels to her shoes, and stick a plume of feathers in her cap? Oh! they will drive me distracted!
SCENE II. Mr. Withrington's House. Agnes discovered embroidering at a small table, Harwood standing by her, and hanging fondly over her as she works. Har. How pretty it is! Now you put a little purple on the side of the flower.
Ag. Yes, a very little shade.
Har. And now a little brown upon that.
Ag. Even so.
Har. And thus you work up and down, with that tiny needle of yours, till the whole flower is completed. (Pauses, still looking at her working.) Why, Agnes, you little witch! you're doing that leaf wrong.
Ag. You may pick it out then, and do it better for me. I'm sure you have been idle enough all the morning, it is time you were employed about something.
Har. And so I will. (Sitting down by her, and taking hold of the work.)
Ag. (Covering the flower with her hand) O! no, no!

[Page 262]
Har. Take away that little perverse hand, and let me begin. (Putting his hand upon hers.)
Ag. What a good for nothing creature you are! you can do nothing yourself, and you will suffer no body else to do any thing. I should have had the whole pattern finished before now, if you had not loitered over my chair so long.
Har. [25]   So you can't work when I look over you? Then I have some influence upon you? O you sly girl! you are caught in your own words at last.
Ag. Indeed, Harwood, I wish you would go home again to your law-books and your precedent hunting; you have mispent a great deal of time here already.
Har. Is it not better to be with you in reality than only in imagination? Ah! Agnes! you little know what my home studies are.—Law, said you! how can I think of law, when your countenance looks upon me from every black lettered page that I turn? When your figure fills the empty seat by my side, and your voice speaks to me in the very mid-day stillness of my chamber? Ah! my sweet Agnes! you will not believe what a foolish fellow I have been, since I first saw you.
Ag. Nay, Harwood, I am not at all incredulous of the fact, it is only the cause of it which I doubt.
Har. Saucy girl! I must surely be revenged upon you for all this.
Ag. I am tired of this work. (Getting up.)

[Page 263]
Har. O! do not give over.—Let me do something [50]   for you—Let me thread your needle for you—I can thread one most nobly.
Ag. There then. (Gives him a needle and silk.)
Har. (Pretending to scratch her hand with it.) So ought you to be punished. (Threads it awkwardly.)
Ag. Ay, nobly done, indeed! but I shall work no more to-day.
Har. You must work up my needleful.
Ag. I am to work a fool's cap in the corner by-and-by, I shall keep your needleful for that. I am going to walk in the garden.
Har. And so am I.
Ag. You are?
Har. Yes, I am. Go where you will, Agnes, to the garden or the field, the city or the desert, by sea or by land, I must e'en go too. I will never be where you are not, but when to be where you are is impossible.
Ag. O! there will be no getting rid of you at this rate, unless some witch will have pity upon me, and carry me up in the air upon her broomstick.
Har. There, I will not pretend to follow you, but as long as you remain upon the earth, Agnes, hang me! if I can find in my heart to budge an inch from your side.
Ag. [75]   You are a madman.
Har. You are a sorceress.
Ag. You are an idler.
Har. You are a little mouse.

[Page 264]
Ag. Come, come, get your hat then, and let us go. (Aside, while he goes to the bottom of the stage for his hat.) Bless me! I have forgot to be ill-humour'd all this time.
                                         [ Exit , hastily. Har. (Coming forward.) Gone for her shawl, I suppose. How delightful she is! how pleasant every change of her countenance! How happy must his life be, spent even in cares and toil, where leisure hours are cheer'd with such a creature as this!
Ag. (Without, in an angry voice.) Dont tell me so: I know very well how it is, and you shall smart for it too, you lazy, careless, impudent fellow! And, besides all this, how dare you use my kitten so?
Har. (Who listened with a rueful face.) Well, now, but this is humanity: she will not have a creature ill used.—I wish she would speak more gently though.
Ag. (Entering.) Troublesome, provoking, careless fellow!
Har. [100]   It is very provoking in him to use the poor kitten ill.
Ag. So it is; but it is more provoking still to mislay my clogs, as he does.
Enter Servant , with clogs. Ser. Here they are, madam.
Ag. Bring them here, I say, (looks at them.) These are Miss Withrington's clogs, you blockhead! (Throws them to the other side of the stage in
[Page 265]
a passion.) I must go without them, I find. (To Harwood.) What are you musing about? If you dont chuse to go with me, good morning.
Har. (Sighing deeply.) Ah, Agnes! you know too well that I cannot stay behind you.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE III. Miss Withrington's Dressing-room. Enter Mariane , who turns back again towards the door, and calls to Agnes without. Mar. Agnes, cousin Agnes, where are you going?
Ag. (Without.) I am returning to Miss Eston, whom I have left in the parlour, talking to the dog.
Mar. Well, let her talk to the dog a little longer, and let me talk to you.
Enter Agnes . Ag. I have set Betty to watch at the higher windows to give notice of Sir Loftus's approach, that we may put ourselves in order to receive him; for I am resolved to have one bout more with him, and discharge him for good, I am quite tired of him now.
Ag. Do you expect him?
Mar. I am pretty sure he will come about this time, and I must be prepared for him. I have a good mind to tell him, at once, I despise him, and that will be a plain easy way of finishing the business.
Ag. No, no, my sweet Mariane! we must send him off with eclat. You have played your part
[Page 266]
very well hitherto; keep it up but for this last time, and let Eston and I go into the closet and enjoy it.
Mar. Well then, do so: I shall please you for this once.
Enter Betty , in haste. Bet. to Mar. Sir Loftus is just coming up the [25]   side path, madam, and he'll be at the door immediately.
Ag. I'll run and bring Eston directly.
                                         [Exit. Mar. (Looking at the door of the closet.) Yes, it is very thin: they will hear well, and see through the key hole.
Re-enter Agnes with Miss Eston , in a great hurry. Est. La! I have torn my gown in my haste.
Ag. Come along, come along.
Est. It it is not so bad a tear though as Mrs. Thomson got the—
Ag. Come, come, we must not stay here. (Pushes Eston into the closet, and follows. Mariane and Betty place a table with books, and a chair, near the front of the stage.)
Est. (Looking from the closet.) La! Mariane, how I long to hear you and him begin. I shall be so delighted!
Mar. For heaven sake shut the door! he will be here immediately. (Shuts the door upon her, and continues to set the room in order.)
Est. (Looking out again.) La! Mariane, do you know how many yards of print Lady Squat has
[Page 267]
got round her new— (Agnes from behind, claps her hand on Eston's mouth, and draws her into the closet.—Mariane seats herself by the table, pretending to read. Exit Betty, and enter Sir Loftus , a servant announcing him.)
Sir Loft. You are very studious this morning, Miss Withrington.
Mar. (Carelessly.) Ha! how do you do?
Sir Loft. You have been well amus'd, I hope?
Mar. So, so. I must put in a mark here, and not lose my place. (Looking on the table.) There [50]   is no paper—O, there is some on the other table: pray do fetch it me! (Pointing to a table at the bottom of the stage.) I am very lazy. (Sits down again indolently.)
Sir Loft. (Fetching the paper, and presenting it with a condescending yet self-important air.) I have the honour to obey you, ma'am.
Mar. I thank you; you are a very serviceable creature, I am sure.
Sir Loft. (Drawing himself up proudly, but immediately correcting himself.) I am always happy to serve Miss Withrington.
Mar. O! I know very well the obliging turn of your disposition. (Tosses her arm upon the table, and throws down a book.) I am very stupid this morning. (Sir Loftus picks up the book, and gives it to her rather sulkily; and she in receiving it drops an ivory ball under the table.) Bless me! What is the matter with all these things? pray lift it for me, good Sir Loftus! I believe you must creep
[Page 268]
under the table for it though. (He stoops under the table with a very bad grace, and she slyly gives it a touch with her foot, which makes it run to the other side of the stage.) Nay, you must go further off for it now. I am very troublesome.
Sir Loft. (Goes after it rather unwillingly, and presenting it to her with still a worse grace.) Madam, this is more honour than I— (mumbling.)
Mar. O, no! Sir Loftus, it is only you that are too good. (Lolling carelessly in her chair.) It is so comfortable to have such a good creature by one! your fine fashionable men are admired to be [75]   sure, but I dont know how, I feel always restrained in their company. With a good obliging creature like you now, I can be quite at my ease: I can just desire you to do any thing.
Sir Loft. Upon my honour, madam, you flatter me very much indeed. Upon my honour, I must say, I am rather at a loss to conceive how I have merited these commendations.
Mar. O! Sir Loftus, you are too humble, too diffident of yourself. I know very well the obliging turn of your disposition to every body.
Sir Loft. (aside.) Damn it! is she an ideot? (aloud.) Your good opinion, madam, does me a great deal of honour, but I assure you, ma'am, it is more than I deserve. I have great pleasure in serving Miss Withrington;—to be at the service of every body is an extent of benevolence I by no means pretend to.
Mar. Now why are you so diffident, Sir Loftus?
[Page 269]
Did not old Mrs. Mumblecake tell me the other day, how you ran nine times to the apothecary's to fetch green salve to rub her monkey's tail.
Sir Loft. She told you a damn'd lie then! (Biting his lip, and walking up and down with hasty strides.) Damn it! this is beyond all bearing! I [100]   run nine times to the apothecary's to fetch green salve for her monkey's tail! If the cursed hag says so again I'll bury her alive!
Mar. Nay, dont be angry about it. I'm sure I thought it very good in you, and I said so to every body.
Sir Loft. You have been so obliging as tell all the world too?
Mar. And why should not I have the pleasure of praising you?
Sir Loft. Hell and the devil! (Turning on his heel, and striding up and down, and muttering as he goes, whilst she sits carelessly with her arms crossed.)
Mar. My good Sir Loftus, you will tire yourself. Had you not better be seated?
Sir Loft. (Endeavouring to compose himself.) The influence you have over me, ma'am, gets the better of every thing. I would not have you mistake my character, however; if love engages me in your service you ought to receive it so. I have been less profuse of these attentions to women of the very first rank and fashion; I might therefore have hoped that you would lend a more favourable ear to my passion.
Mar. Indeed you wrong me. You dont know
[Page 270]
how favourable my ear may be disposed: sit down here and tell me all about it. (Sir Loftus revolts again at her familiarity, but stifles his pride and sits down by her.)
Sir Loft. [125]   Permit me to say, madam, that it is time we should come to an explanation of each other's sentiments.
Mar. Whenever you please, sir.
Sir Loft. (Bowing.) I hope then, I may be allowed to presume, that my particular attentions to you, pardon me, ma'am, have not been altogether disagreeable to you.
Mar. O! not at all, Sir Loftus.
Sir Loft. (Bowing again.) I will presume then, still farther, ma'am, and declare to you, that from the very day which gave birth to my passion, I have not ceased to think of you with the most ardent tenderness.
Mar. La! Sir Loftus, was it not of a Wednesday?
Sir Loft. (Fretted.) Upon my word I am not so very accurate: it might be Wednesday, or Friday, or any day.
Mar. Of a Friday, do you think? it runs strangely in my head that we saw one another first of a Wednesday.
Sir Loft. (Very much fretted.) I say, ma'am, the day which gave birth to my love—
Mar. O! very true! You might see me first of a Wednesday, and yet not fall in love with me till [150]   the Friday. (Sir Loftus starts up in a passion, and
[Page 271]
strides up and down.—Mariane rising from her seat carelessly.) I wonder where William has put the nuts I bought for Miss Eston's squirrel. I think I hear a mouse in the cupboard. (Goes to the bottom of the room, and opens a small cupboard in the wall, whilst Sir Loftus comes forward to the front.)
Sir Loft. (aside.) Damn her freaks! I wish the devil had the wooing of her. (Pauses.) I must not lose her for a trifle though; but when she is once secured, I'll be revenged! I'll vex her! I'll drive the spirit out of her. (Aloud, as she comes forward from the cupboard.) My passion for you, Miss Withrington, is too generous and disinterested to merit this indifference.
Mar. I'm glad they have not eat the nuts though.
Sir Loft. (aside.) Curse her and her nuts! I'll tame her! (aloud.) My sentiments for you, ma'am, are of so delicate and tender a nature, they do indeed deserve your indulgence. Tell me then, can the most disinterested, the most fervent love, make any impression on your heart? I can no longer exist in this state of anxiety! at your feet let me implore you— (Seems about to kneel, but rather unwilling, as if he wished to be prevented.)
Mar. Pray, Sir Loftus, dont kneel there! my maid has spilt oil on the floor.
Sir Loft. Since you will not permit me to have [175]   the pleasure of kneeling at—
Mar. Nay, I will not deprive you of the pleasure
[Page 272]
—There is no oil spilt here. (Pointing to a part of the floor very near the closet door.)
Sir Loft. I see it would be disagreeable to you.
Mar. I see very well you are not inclined to condescend so far.
Sir Loft. (Kneeling directly.) Believe me, madam, the pride, the pleasure of my life, is to be devoted to the most adorable— (Mariane gives a significant cough, and Agnes and Eston burst from the closet, the door opening on the outside, comes against Sir Loftus as he kneels, and lays him sprawling on the floor.)
Ag. Est. and Mar. (Speaking together.) O Sir Loftus! poor Sir Loftus! (All coming about him, pretending to assist him to get up, but in reality hindering him.)
Sir Loft. Damn their bawling! they will bring the whole family here!
Enter Mr. Withrington and Opal , and Sir Loftus, mad with rage, makes a desperate effort, and gets upon his legs. Opal stands laughing at him without any ceremony, whilst he bites his lips, and draws himself up haughtily. Mar. to Sir Loft. I'm afraid you have hurt yourself?
Sir Loft. (Shortly.) No, ma'am.
Ag. Hav'nt you rubbed the skin of your shins, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. No, ma'am.

[Page 273]
Est. Nor off your toes, Sir Loftus?
Sir Loft. No, ma'am.
Ag. I'm sure he has hurt his poor dear nose, but he is ashamed to own it.
Sir Loft. Neither toes nor nose! Devil take it!
With. Get along, girls, and dont torment this [200]   poor man any longer. I am afraid, Sir Loftus, the young gipsies have been making a fool of you.
Sir Loft. Sir, it is neither in your power nor their's to make a fool of me.
Op. Ha, ha, ha, ha! 'Faith Prettyman you must forgive me! ha, ha, ha, ha! I never thought in my life to have caught you at such low prostrations. But dont be so angry, man! though you do make a confounded silly figure, it must be confess'd. Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Sir Loft. to Op. Sir, your impertinence and yourself are equally contemptible: and I desire you would no longer take the trouble of intruding yourself into my company, nor of affronting me, as you have hitherto done, with your awkward imitation of my figure and address.
Op. What the devil do you mean? I imitate your figure and address! I scorn to—I will not deny that I may have insensibly acquired a little of them both for—for— (Hesitating.)
Ag. For he has observed people laughing at him of late.
Sir Loft. (Turning on his heel.) He is beneath my resentment.
Mar. Be not so angry, good Sir Loftus! let us
[Page 274]
[225]   end this business for the present, and when I am at leisure to hear the remainder of your declarations, which has been so unfortunately interrupted, I'll send and let you know.
Sir Loft. No, 'faith, madam! you have heard the last words I shall ever say to you upon the subject. A large fortune may make amends for an ordinary person, madam, but not for vulgarity and impertinence. Good morning. (As he is going out enter Servant.)
Ser. Lord Saunter, and Colonel Gorget are coming up stairs, to see how Sir Loftus Prettyman does after his fall.
Sir Loft. Hell and damnation! I'll go out by the other door.
Mar. That door is locked; you can't go that way.
Sir Loft. I'll burst it open then. (Runs to the door: they all get about him to prevent him.)
Sir Loft. (Struggling.) What, is there no getting out from this den of devils? (Breaks from them, and Exit , leaving them laughing provokingly behind him.)
With. (Shaking his head.) This is too bad, this is too bad, young ladies! I am ashamed to have all this rioting and absurdity going on in my house.
Ag. Come away, uncle, and see him go down the back walk, from the parlour windows. I'll warrant you he'll stride it away most nobly. (Withrington follows, shrugging up his shoulders.)
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 275]
ACT V. SCENE I. Mr. Withrington's Library. Mr. Withrington discovered seated by a table. With. Who waits there? (Enter Servant .) Tell Miss Agnes Withrington I wish to see her. [ Exit servant.) What an absurd fellow this Harwood is, to be so completely bewitched with such a girl as Agnes! If she were like the women I remember, there would indeed be some— (Agnes entering softly behind him, gives him a tap on the shoulder.)
Ag. Well, uncle, what are you grumbling about? Have you lost your wager? Harwood has just left you, I hear.
With. I believe you may buy those trinkum, trankum ornaments for Mariane whenever you please.
Ag. Pray look not so ungraciously upon the matter! But you can't forgive him, I suppose, for being such a ninny as to fall in love with a little ordinary girl, eh?
With. And so he is a ninny, and a fool, and a very silly fellow.
Ag. Do tell me what he has been saying to you.
With. Why, he confesses thou art ill-tempered, that thou art freakish, that thou art extravagant; and that of all the friends he has spoken with upon the subject, there is not one who will allow thee [25]   beauty enough to make a good looking pot-girl.

[Page 276]
Ag. Did he say so?
With. Why, something nearly equivalent to it, Agnes. Yet, notwithstanding all this, there is something about thee so unaccountably delightful to him, that, poor as thou art, he will give up the fair hopes of opulence, and the pleasures of freedom, to watch for thee, drudge for thee, pinch himself for thee, if thou wilt have the condescension, in return, to plague and torment him for life.
Ag. Foolish enough indeed, yet heaven bless him for it! What a fortunate woman am I! I sought a disinterested lover, and I have found a most wonderful one.
With. I dare say you think yourself very fortunate.
Ag. And dont you, likewise, my good sir? but you seem displeased at it.
With. You guess rightly enough: I must speak without disguise, Agnes, I am not pleased.
Ag. Ah! his want of fortune—
With. Poo! you know very well I despise all mercenary balancing of property. It is not that which disturbs me. To be the disinterested choice of a worthy man is what every woman, who means [50]   to marry at all, would be ambitious of; and a point in regard to her marriage, which a woman of fortune would be unwilling to leave doubtful. But there are men whose passions are of such a violent over-bearing nature, that love in them, may be considered as a disease of the mind; and the object
[Page 277]
of it claims no more perfection or pre-eminence amongst women, than chalk, lime, or oatmeal may do amongst dainties, because some diseased stomachs do prefer them to all things. Such men as these, we sometimes see attach themselves even to ugliness and infamy, in defiance of honour and decency. With such men as these, women of sense and refinement can never be happy; nay, to be willingly the object of their love is disrespectable. (Pauses.) But you dont care for all this, I suppose? It does well enough for an old uncle to perplex himself with these niceties: it is you yourself the dear man happens to love, and none of those naughty women I have been talking of. So all is very right. (Pauses, and she seems thoughtful.)
Ag. (Assuming a grave and more dignified air.) No, sir, you injure me: prove that his love for me is stronger than his love of virtue, and I will—
With. What will you do, Agnes?
Ag. I will give him up for ever.
With. [75]   Ay, there spoke a brave girl! you deserve the best husband in Christendom for this.
Ag. Nay, my husband-hunting will end here. If Harwood endures not the test, I will indeed renounce him, but no other man shall ever fill his place.
With. Well, well, we shall see, we shall see. (Walks up and down. She is thoughtful.) You are very thoughtful, Agnes; I fear I have distressed you.

[Page 278]
Ag. You have distressed me, yet I thank you for it. I have been too presumptuous, I have ventured farther than I ought. Since it is so, I will not shrink from the trial. (Pauses.) Dont you think he will go through it honourably?
With. (Shaking his head.) Indeed I know not— I hope he will.
Ag. You hope? I thank you for that word, my dear sir! I hope he will too. (She remains thoughtful: he takes a turn or two cross the stage.)
With. (Clapping her shoulder affectionately.) What are you thinking of, niece?
Ag. How to set about this business.
With. And how will you do it?
Ag. I will write a letter to Lady Fade, asking pardon for having told some malicious falsehoods of her, to a relation of whom she is dependant [100]   upon, and begging she will make up the matter, and forgive me; promising at the same time, most humbly, if she will not expose me for this time, never to offend so any more. Next time he comes I will make him direct the letter himself, that when it falls into his hands again, he may have no doubt of its authenticity. Will this do?
With. Yes, very well. If he loves you after this, his love is not worth the having.
Ag. Ah, uncle! you are very hard hearted! But you are very right: I know you are very right. Pray does not Royston lodge in the same house with Harwood?
With. He does.

[Page 279]
Ag. I wish, by his means, we could conceal ourselves somewhere in his apartments, where we might see Harwood have the letter put into his hands, and observe his behaviour. I dont know any body else who can do this for us: do you think you could put him into good humour again?
With. I rather think I can, for he hath still a favour to ask of me.
Ag. We must give him a part to act; do you think he can do it?
With. He is a very blundering fellow, but he [125]   will be so flattered with being let into the secret, that I know he will do his best.
Enter Mariane . Mar. What have you been about so long together?
With. Hatching a new plot, girl! and we set about it directly too.
Mar. I am very sure the plot is of your own hatching, then, for I never saw Agnes with any thing of this kind in her head, wear such a grave spiritless face upon it before.
With. You are mistaken, ma'am, it is of her own contrivance, but you shall know nothing about it. And I give you warning that this shall be the last of them, if you have got any more poor devils on your hands to torment, do it quickly; for I will have an end put to all this foolery. I will have my family put in order again, and well dressed people to drink tea with me, as I
[Page 280]
used to have, instead of all this up and down irregular kind of living, which I abhor.
Mar. Very well, uncle, I have just been following your advice. I have discarded Sir Ullock O'Grady, and I have only now poor Opal to reward for his services. I have got a promise of marriage from him, in which he forfeits ten [150]   thousand pounds if he draws back, I shall torment him with this a little. It was an extraordinary thing to be sure for an heiress to demand, but I told him it was the fashion; and now that he has bound himself so securely, he is quite at heart's ease, and thinks every thing snug and well settled.
Enter Royston , a Servant announcing him. With. Your servant, Mr. Royston, I am very glad to see you. Dont start at seeing the ladies with me, I know my niece, Mariane, and you have had a little misunderstanding, but when I have explained the matter to you, you will be friends with her again, and laugh at it yourself.
Roy. (coldly.) I have the honour to wish the ladies good morning.
With. Nay, cousin, you dont understand how it is; these girls have been playing tricks upon every man they have met with since they came here; and when that wild creature, (pointing to Mariane,) was only laughing at the cheat she had passed upon them all, which I shall explain to you presently, you thought she was laughing at you;
[Page 281]
shake hands, and be friends with her, cousin; nobody minds what a foolish girl does.
Roy. (With his face brightening up.) O! for [175]   that matter, I mind these things as little as any body, cousin Withrington. I have too many affairs of importance in my hands, to attend to such little matters as these. I am glad the young lady had a hearty laugh with all my soul; and I shall be happy to see her as merry again whenever she has a mind to it. I mind it! no, no, no!
Mar. I thank you, sir, and I hope we shall be merry again, when you shall have your own share of the joke.
Roy. Yes, yes, we shall be very merry. By the bye, Withrington, I came here to tell you, that I have got my business with the duke put into so good a train, that it can hardly misgive.
With. I am happy to hear it.
Roy. You must know I have set very artfully about it, cousin; but I dare say you would guess as much, he, he, he! You know me of old, eh? I have got Mr. Cullyfool to ask it for me on his own account; I have bribed an old house-keeper, who is to interest a great lady in my favour; I have called eleven times on his grace's half cousin, till she has fairly promised to write to my lady dutchess upon the business; I have written to the steward, and promised his son all my interest at [200]   next election, if he has any mind to stand for our borough, you know, and I have applied by a friend—No, no, he has applied through the medium
[Page 282]
of another friend, or rather, I believe, by that friend's wife, or aunt, or some way or other, I dont exactly remember, but it is a very good channel, I know.
With. O! I make no doubt of it.
Roy. Nay, my landlady, has engaged her apothecary's wife to speak to his grace's physician about it; and a medical man, you know, sometimes asks a favour with great advantage, when a patient believes that his life is in his hands. The duke has got a most furious fit of gout, and it has been in his stomach too, ha, ha, ha, ha!— If we can't succeed without it, I have a friend who will offer a round sum for me, at last, but I hope this will not be necessary. Pray, do you know of any other good channel to solicit by?
With. 'Faith, Royston! you have found out too many roads to one place already, I fear you'll lose your way amongst them all.
Roy. Nay, nay, cousin, I won't be put off so. I have been told this morning you are acquainted with Mr. Sucksop, the duke's greatest friend and [225]   adviser. Come, come! you must use your interest for me.
With. Well, then, come into the other room, and we shall speak about it. I have a favour to ask of you too.
Roy. My dear sir, any favour in my power you may absolutely command at all times. I'll follow you, cousin. (Goes to the door with Withrington with great alacrity, but, recollecting that he has forgotten
[Page 283]
to pay his compliments to the ladies, hurries back again, and, after making several very profound bows to them, follows Withrington into another room.)
Mar. (Imitating him.) Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Ag. Softly, Mariane; let us leave this room, if you must laugh, for he will overhear you.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE II. Royston's Lodgings: enter Royston , conducting in Agnes, Mariane , and Withrington . Roy. Now, pray compose yourselves, young ladies, and sit down a little. I'll manage every thing: dont give yourselves any trouble; I'll set the whole plot a going.
With. We depend entirely upon you, Royston.
Roy. I know you do, many a one depends upon me, cousin Withrington. I'll shew you how I'll manage it. Jonathan, come here, Jonathan! (Enter Jonathan.) Bring me that screen from the other room. (Exit Jonathan.) We'll place it here, if you please, cousin, and then you and the ladies can stand as snugly behind it, as kings and queens in a puppet-show, till your time comes to appear. (Enter Jonathan with screen.) Come hither with it, Jonathan: place it here. (Pointing.) No, no, jolter-head, nearer the wall with it. (Going behind it, and coming out again.) It will do better a little more to this side, for then it will be farther from the window.

[Page 284]
Ag. O! it will do very well, sir, you take too much trouble.
Roy. Trouble, my dear ma'am! if it were a hundred times more trouble, I should be happy to serve you. I dont mind trouble, if I can get [25]   the thing done cleverly and completely. That's my way of doing things. No, it dont stand to please me yet, it is too near the door now, and the ladies may catch cold, perhaps.
Ag. (Very uneasy.) Indeed, it stands very well! Harwood will be here before we are ready.
Roy. to Jon. Blockhead, that thou art! can'st thou not set it up even? Now that will do. (Getting behind it.) This will do. (Coming out again.) Yes, this will do to a nicety.
Mar. (Aside.) Heaven be praised this grand matter is settled at last!
Roy. Now, he'll think it odd, perhaps, that I have a screen in my room; but I have a trick for that, ladies; I'll tell him I mean to purchase lands in Canada, and have been looking over the map of America. (Agnes looks to Withrington very uneasy.)
With. Dont do that, Royston, for then he will examine the screen.
Roy. Or, I may say, there is a chink in the wall, and I placed it to keep out the air.
Ag. No, no, that wont do. For heaven's sake, sir!
Roy. Then I shall just say, I love to have a screen in my room, for I am used to it at home.

[Page 285]
Mar. [50]   Bless me, Mr. Royston! can't you just leave it alone, and he'll take no notice of it.
Roy. O! if he takes no notice of it, that is a different thing, Miss Withrington; but dont be uneasy, I'll manage it all: I'll conduct the whole business.
Ag. (Aside to Withrington.) O! my good sir! this fool will ruin every thing.
With. Be quiet, Agnes, we are in for it now.
Roy. Let me remember my lesson too. Here is the letter for him, with the seal as naturally broken, as if the lady had done it herself. Harwood will wonder, now, how I came to know about all this. 'Faith! I believe, he thinks me a strange diving, penetrating, kind of a genius, already, and he is not far wrong, perhaps. You know me, cousin Withrington: ha, ha, ha, ha! You know me.
Ag. O! I wish it were over, and we were out of this house again!
Roy. Dont be uneasy, ma'am, I'll manage every thing. Jonathan, (Enter Jonathan,) dont you go and tell Mr. Harwood that I have got company here.
Jon. No, no, your honour, I knows better than [75]   that; for the ladies are to be behind the screen, sir, and he must know nothing of the matter, to be sure. I'ficken! it will be rare sport!
Ag. (Starting.) I hear a knock at the door.
Roy. It is him, I dare say, run Jonathan.
                                         [Exit, Jonathan .
[Page 286]
Ag. Come, come, let us hide ourselves. (All get behind the screen but Royston.)
Roy. Ay, ay, it will do very well. (Looking at the screen.)
Ag. (Behind.) Mariane, dont breathe so loud.
Mar. (Behind.) I dont breathe loud.
Ag. (Behind.) Do uncle draw in the edge of your coat.
With. (Behind.) Poo, silly girl! they can't see a bit of it.
Enter Colonel Hardy and Harwood . Roy. Ha! your servant, my dear Colonel. How goes it, Harwood? I bid my man tell you I was alone, and very much disposed for your good company; but I am doubly fortunate. (Bowing to the Colonel.)
Col. Indeed, Royston, I have been pretty much with him these two days past, and I dont believe he gives me great thanks for my company. I am like an old horse running after a colt, the young devil never fails to turn now and then, and give him a kick for his pains.
Har. Nay, my good friend, I must be an ass's colt, then. I am sure, I mean it not, but I am [100]   not happy, and I fear I have been peevish with you.
Roy. (Attempting to look arch.) Peevish, and all that, perhaps, the young man is in love, Colonel.

[Page 287]
Col. No more, if you please, Royston: we are to speak of this no more.
Enter Jonathan . Jon. Did your honour call?
Roy. No, sirrah. (Jonathan goes, as if he were looking for something, and takes a sly peep behind the screen, to see if they are all there.) What are you peeping there for? get along, you hound! Does he want to make people believe I keep rary shews behind the wainscot? (Exit, Jonathan.) But as I was a saying, Colonel, perhaps the young man is in love. He, he, he!
Col. No, no, let us have no more of it.
Roy. But 'faith, I know that he is so! and I know the lady too. She is a cousin of my own, and I am as well acquainted with her, as I am with my own dog.—But you dont ask me what kind of a girl she is. (To the Colonel.)
Col. Give over now, Royston: she is a very good girl, I dare say.
Roy. Well, you may think so, but— (Making significant faces) But—I should not say all I know of my own cousin, to be sure, but—
Har. [125]   What are all those cursed grimaces for? Her faults are plain and open as her perfections: these she disdains to conceal, and the others it is impossible.
Roy. Softly, Harwood, dont be in a passion, unless you would imitate your mistress; for she has not the gentlest temper in the world.

[Page 288]
Har. Well, well, I love her the better for it. I can't bear your insipid passionless women: I would as soon live upon sweet curd all my life, as attach myself to one of them.
Roy. She is very extravagant.
Har. Heaven bless the good folks! would they have a man to give up the woman of his heart, because she likes a bit of lace upon her petticoat.
Roy. Well, but she is—
Col. Devil take you, Royston! can't you hold your tongue about her? you see he can't bear it.
Roy. (Making signs to the Colonel.) Let me alone; I know when to speak, and when to hold my tongue, as well as another. Indeed, Harwood, I am your friend; and though the lady is my relation, I must say, I wish you had made a better choice. I have discovered something in regard to her this morning, which shews her to [150]   be a very improper one. I cannot say, however, that I have discovered any thing which surprised me, I know her too well.
Har. (Vehemently.) You are imposed upon by some damn'd falsehood.
Roy. But I have proof of what I say; the lady who is injured by her, gave me this letter to shew to Mr. Withrington. (Taking out the letter.)
Har. It is some fiend who wants to undermine her, and has forged that scrawl to serve her spiteful purpose.
Roys. I would be glad it were so, my dear
[Page 289]
friend; but Lady Fade is a woman, whose veracity has never been suspected.
Har. Is it from Lady Fade? Give it me. (Snatching the letter.)
Roy. It is Agnes's hand, is it not?
Har. It is, at least, a good imitation of it.
Roy. Read the contents, pray!
Har. Madam, what I have said to the prejudice of your ladyship's character to your relation, Mr. Worthy, I am heartily sorry for; and I am ready to beg pardon on my knees if you desire it; to acknowledge before Mr. Worthy himself, that it is a falsehood, or make any other reparation, in a [175]   private way, that you may desire. Let me, then, conjure your ladyship not to expose me, and I shall ever remain your most penitent and grateful A. Withrington.
Roy. The lady would not be so easily pacified, though; for she blackened her character, in order to make her best friend upon earth quarrel with her; so she gave me the letter to shew to her uncle. Is it forged, think you?
Har. It is possible!—I will venture to say— Nay, I am sure it is.
Roy. If it is, there is one circumstance which may help to discover the author, it is directed by a different hand on the back. Look at it.
Har. (In great perturbation.) Is it? (Turns hastily the folds of the letter, but his hand trembles so much, he can't find the back.)
Col. My dear Harwood! this is the back of
[Page 290]
the letter; and methinks the writing is somewhat like your own. (Harwood looks at it; then staggering back, throws himself into a chair, which happens to be behind him, and covers his upper face with his hand.)
Col. My dear Harwood!
Roy. See how his lips quiver, and his bosom heaves! Let us unbutton him: I fear he is going into a fit. (Agnes comes from behind the screen in a fright, and Withrington pulls her in again.)
Col. (With great tenderness.) My dear Harwood!
Har. (With a broken voice.) I'll go to mine own chamber. (Gets up hastily from his chair, and then falls back again in a faint.)
Col. [200]   He's gone off.
Roys. Help, help, here! (Running about.) Who has got hartshorn, or lavender, or water! help here. (They all come from behind the screen. Agnes runs to Harwood, and sprinkles him over with lavender, rubbing his temples, &c. whilst Colonel Hardy stares at them all in amazement.)
Ag. Alas! we have carried this too far? Harwood! my dear Harwood!
Col. to Roys. What is all this?
Roys. I thought we should amaze you. I knew I should manage it.
Col. You have managed finely indeed, to put Harwood into such a state, with your mummery.
Ag. Will he not come to himself again! get some water, Mariane—See how pale he is. (He
[Page 291]
recovers.) O! he recovers! Harwood! do you know me, Harwood?
Har. (Looking upon Agnes, and shrinking back from her.) Ha! what has brought you here? leave me! leave me! I am wretched enough already.
Ag. I come to bring you relief, my dear Harwood.
Har. No, madam, it is misery you bring. We must part for ever.
Ag. O! uncle! do you hear that? He says we must part for ever.
With. (Taking hold of Agnes.) Dont be in such a hurry about it.
Har. (Rising up.) How came you here? (to Withrington,) [225]   and these ladies?
Roys. O! it was all my contrivance.
With. Pray now, Royston, be quiet a little— Mr. Harwood, I will speak to you seriously. I see you are attached to my niece, and I confess she has many faults; but you are a man of sense, and with you she will make a more respectable figure in the world than with any other. I am anxious for her welfare, and if you will marry her I will give her such a fortune as will make it no longer an imprudent step to follow your inclinations.
Har. No, sir, you shall keep your fortune and your too bewitching niece together. For her sake I would have renounced all ambition, I would have shared with her poverty and neglect, I would have borne with all her faults and weaknesses of
[Page 292]
nature, I would have toiled, I would have bled for her, but I can never yoke myself with unworthiness.
Ag. (Wiping her eyes, and giving two skips upon the floor.) O! admirable! admirable! speak to him, uncle! tell him all, my dear uncle! for I can't say a word.
Col. (Aside to Royston.) Isn't she a little wrong in the head, Royston?
With. Give me your hand, Harwood: you are a noble fellow, and you shall marry this little girl [250]   of mine after all. This story of the letter and Lady Fade, was only a concerted one amongst us, to prove what mettle you are made of. Agnes, to try your love, affected to be shrewish and extravagant; and afterwards, at my suggestion, to try your principles, contrived this little plot, which has just now been unravelled: but I do assure you, on the word of an honest man, there is not a better girl in the kingdom. I must own, however, she is a fanciful little toad. (Harwood runs to Agnes, catches her in his arms, and runs two or three times round with her, then takes her hand and kisses it, and then puts his knee to the ground.)
Har. My charming, my delightful Agnes! Oh! what a fool have I been! how could I suppose it.
Ag. We took some pains upon you, and it would have been hard if we could not have deceived you amongst us all.
Har. And so thou art a good girl, a very good girl. I know thou art. I'll be hang'd if thou hast one fault in the world.

[Page 293]
With. No, no, Harwood, not quite so perfect. I can prove her still to be an arrant cheat; for she pretended to be careless of you when she thought of you all the day long, and she pretended to be poor with an hundred thousand pounds, independant of any one, in her possession. She is Miss Withrington the heiress, and this lady, (pointing to Mariane,) [275]   has only been her representative, for a time, for reasons which I shall explain to you by-and-by. (Harwood lets go Agnes's hand, and steps back some paces with a certain gravity and distance in his air.)
With. What is the matter now, Hrwood, does this cast a damp upon you?
Roys. It is a weighty distress, truly. Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Col. By heaven! this is good.
Ag. (Going up to Harwood, and holding out her hand.) Do not look so distantly upon me, Harwood. You was willing to marry me as a poor woman; if there is any thing in my fortune which offends you, I scatter it to the winds.
Har. My admirable girl, it is astonishment, it is something I cannot express, which overcomes, I had almost said distresses me at present. (Presenting her to the Colonel.) Colonel Hardy, this is the woman I have raved about, this is the woman I have boasted of, this is my Agnes. And this, Miss Withrington, is Colonel Hardy, my own, and my father's friend.
Ag. (Holding out her hand to the Colonel.) He shall be mine too. Every friend of your's shall be
[Page 294]
my friend, Harwood; but the friend of your father my most respected one.
Har. Do you hear that, Colonel?
Col. I hear it, my heart hears it, and I bless [300]   you both.
Har. to With. My dear sir, what shall I say to you for all this goodness?
Ag. Tell him he is the dearest good uncle on earth, and we will love him all our lives for it. Yes, indeed, we will, uncle, (clapping his shoulder,) very, very dearly.
Roys. Now, good folks, have not I managed it cleverly?
Mar. Pray let me come from the back ground a little: and since I must quit all the splendour of heiresship, I desire, at least, that I may have some respect paid me for having filled the situation so well, as the old Mayor receives the thanks of the corporation, when the new Mayor—Bless me! here comes Opal! I have not just done with it yet.
With. Your servant, Mr. Opal.
Mar. to Op. Are not you surprised to find us all here?
Op. Harwood I know is a very lucky fellow, but I knew you were here. It is impossible, you see, to escape me. But (half aside to Mariane) I wanted to tell you Colonel Beaumont is come to Bath. Now I should like to be introduced to him on his arrival. He will be very much the fashion [325]   I dare say, and I should like to have a friendship for
[Page 295]
him. You understand me? You can procure this for me, I know.
With. Come, Mr. Opal, you must join in our good humour here, for we have just been making up a match. My niece, Agnes, with a large fortune bestows herself on a worthy man, who would have married her without one; and, Mariane, who for certain reasons has assumed her character of heiress since we came to Bath, leaves all her borrowed state, in hopes that the man who would have married with a fortune, will not now forsake her.
Op. (Stammering.) Wh—Wh—What is all this?
Roy. (Half aside to Opal.) You seem disturbed, Mr. Opal, you have not been paying your addresses to her, I hope.
Op. (Aside to Royston.) No, not paying my addresses; that is to say, not absolutely. I have paid her some attention to be sure.
Roy. (Nodding significantly.) It is well for you it is no worse.
Mar. (Turning to Opal, who looks very much frightened.) What is it you say? Dont you think I overheard it? Not paid your addresses to me! O! you false man! can you deny the declarations you [350]   have made? the oaths you have sworn? O! you false man!
Op. Upon honour, madam, we men of fashion dont expect to be called to an account for every foolish thing we say.
Mar. What you have written then shall witness
[Page 296]
against you. Will you deny this promise of marriage in your own hand-writing? (Taking out a paper.)
Roy. (Aside to Opal.) What, a promise of marriage, Mr. Opal? The devil himself could not have put it into your head to do a worse thing than this.
Op. (Very frightened, but making a great exertion.) Dont think, ma'am, to bully me into the match. I can prove that promise to be given to you under the false character of an heiress, therefore your deceit loosens the obligation.
With. Take care what you say, sir, (to Opal,) I will not see my niece wronged. The law shall do her justice, whatever expence it may cost me.
Mar. Being an heiress or not has nothing to do in the matter, Mr. Opal; for you expressly say in this promise, that my beauty and perfections alone have induced you to engage yourself, and I will take all the men in court to witness, whether I am not as handsome to-day as I was yesterday.
Op. [375]   I protest there is not such a word in the paper.
Mar. (Holding out the paper.) O base man! will you deny your own writing? (Opal snatches the paper from her, tears it to pieces.)
Mar. (Gathering up the scattered pieces.) O! I can put them together again. (Opal, snatching up one of the pieces, crams it into his mouth and chews it.)
Roy. Chew fast, Opal, she will snatch it out
[Page 297]
of your mouth else. There is another bit for you. (Offering him another piece.)
Mar. (Bursting into a loud laugh, in which all the company join. Is it very nice, Mr. Opal? You munch it up as expeditiously as a bit of plumb-cake.
Op. What the deuce does all this mean?
With. This naughty girl, Mr. Opal, has only been amusing herself with your promise, which she never meant to make any other use of; she is already engaged to a very worthy young man, who will receive with her a fortune by no means contemptible.
Op. Well, well, much good may it do him: what do I care about— (mumbling to himself.)
Roy. (Clapping Opal's shoulder.) Ha, ha, ha! dont look so foolish man; you did not know a word of all this, now. Ha, ha, ha! how some people do get themselves into scrapes! They have [400]   no more notion of managing their affairs than if they were so many sheep. Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Enter Humphry . Humph. to Roy. I would speak a word with your honour. (Whispers to Royston.)
Roy. (In a rage.) What! given away the place! It is impossible! It is some wicked machination! it is some damn'd trick!
With. Be moderate, Royston: what has good Mr. Humphry been telling you?
Roy. O! the devil of a bite! his grace has
[Page 298]
given away the place to a poor simpleton, who had never a soul to speak for him.
With. Who told you this, Mr. Humphry?
Humph. Truly, sir, I called upon his Grace's gentleman, just to make up a kind of acquaintance with him, as his honour desired me, and he told me it was given away this morning.
Roy. What cursed luck!
Humph. Why, says I, I thought my master was to have had it, Mr. Smoothly; and so he would, says he, but one person came to the Duke after another, teazing him about Mr. Royston, till he grew quite impatient; for there was but one of all those friends, says he, winking with his eye so, who did speak at last to the purpose, but then [425]   upon Mr. Sucksop's taking up your master's interest, he shrunk back from his word, which offended his grace very much.
Roy. Blundering blockhead!
Humph. But after all, says he, it might have come round again, if the gout had not stung him so wickedly, when in came the doctor, who has promised to cure him these three weeks, and only made it so much the worse, and upon his likewise presuming to teaze him about Mr. Royston, he fell into a violent passion, and gave away the place directly to poor Mr. Drudgewell, who had no recommendation at all, but fifteen years hard service in the office.
Roy. Well, now! well, now! you see how the world goes: simpletons and ideots carry every thing before them.

[Page 299]
With. Nay, Royston, blame yourself too. Did not I tell you, you had found out too many roads to one place, and would lose your way amongst them?
Roy. No, no, it is all that cursed perverse fate of mine! By the Lord, half the trouble I have taken for this paltry office, would have procured some people an archbishoprick. There is Harwood, [450]   now, fortune presses herself upon him, and makes him, at one stroke, an idle gentleman for life.
Har. No, sir, an idle gentleman I will never be: my Agnes shall never be the wife of any thing so contemptible.
Ag. I thank you, Harwood; I do, indeed, look for an honourable distinction in being your wife; you shall still exert your powers in the profession you have chosen: you shall be the weak ones stay, the poor man's advocate; you shall gain fair fame in recompense, and that will be our nobility.
With. Well said, my children! you have more sense than I thought you had amongst all these whimsies. Now, let us take our leave of plots and story-telling, if you please, and all go to my house to supper. Royston shall drown his disappointment in a can of warm negus, and Mr. Opal shall have something more palatable than his last spare morsel.
                                         [Exeunt. Back matter

THE END OF THE TRYAL.
NOTES
1
AG
AG. EST. AND MAR
BET
COL
E
EST
HAR
HARWOOD
HUMPH
JON
MAR
MISS ESTON
OP
R
ROY
ROYS
SER
SIR LOFT
THOM
WITH

Title: The tryal (1798 (volume one), 1802 (volume two), 1812 (volume three))

Publication title: A Series Of Plays: in Which It Is Attempted To Delineate the Stronger Passions Of the Mind

Pages: 3 v.

Publication date: 1798 (volume one), 1802 (volume two), 1812 (volume three)

Publication year: 1798

Publisher/Imprint: Printed for ... T. Cadell ... and W. Davies

Physical description: [4 ] , 411, [1 ] p.

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: London

Publication subject: Literature

Source type: Book

Language of publication: English

Document type: Book, Comedy

Document note: The tryal.; Co medy.; Date first published: 1798.; Date first performed: Unknown or unacted.

Publication note: Preliminaries and introductory matter omitted; The following plays have been taken from this source:; From Vol. I; The Tryal: A Comedy; From Vol. II; The Election: A Comedy, In Five Acts; The Second Marriage: A Comedy. In Five Acts; From Vol. III; The Dream: A Tragedy, In Prose; The Siege: A Comedy, In Five Acts; .

Accession number: D0100065

ProQuest document ID: 2138577170

Document URL: http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/tryal-1798-volume-one-1802-two-1812-three/docview/2138577170/se-2?accountid=14270

Database: Literature Online

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2022 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions