____________________________________________________________

The stripling (1836)

Author: Baillie, Joanna

Publication info: Dramas, By Joanna Baillie. In Three Volumes . 3 v. London: Printed for Longman, Rees, Orme, 1836.

http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/stripling-1836/docview/2138579409/se-2?accountid=14270

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://temple-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/openurl/01TULI/TULI??url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:book&amp;genre=book&amp;sid=ProQ:ProQ%3Aed&amp;atitle=&amp;title=The+stripling+%281836%29&amp;issn=&amp;date=1836-01-01&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;spage=109&amp;au=Baillie%2C+Joanna&amp;isbn=&amp;jtitle=&amp;btitle=The+stripling+%281836%29&amp;rft_id=info:eric/D0100064&amp;rft_id=info:doi/

Full text: THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY. IN FIVE ACTS.
[Page 109]
Front matter
ADVERTISEMENT. The following Play was written when Master Betty, known by the name of the Young Roscius, was in the highest favour with the public, and before I had seen him perform; but, upon after consideration, was not offered to the theatre. It appears to me, in reading it again, after a long lapse of years, to be a Play not ill suited to a very young actor, at the beginning of his career; being in prose, and having, I hope, no false, overstrained passion in it, to mislead him into ranting or exaggerated expression, either as to gesture, voice, or face.
Were there more characters of simple nature, adapted to young actors, to be found in our dramatic stores, they would not at first acquire those bad habits which so often prevent their after excellence. And the public would, in this early stage of their progress, receive from them a rational entertainment; for, surely, to see a boy assuming the warlike air and tormenting jealousy of Othello, or the delicate and complicated feelings of the Prince of Denmark, scarcely deserves that name.

[Page 110]
The story of the Play is in some measure taken from a melancholy event which took place many years ago in Glasgow, yet still within the recollection of some of its present inhabitants. A young man, whose father was in prison, and about to be tried for a capital offence,—his fate depending on the single evidence of one person, which it was believed must prove fatal,—fired through a window at night, and killed the dreaded witness. The father's life was by this means spared, and the son was executed for the criminal act, though it was perpetrated from the strongest feeling of filial affection, being himself in no degree implicated in the guilt of his father.


[Page 111]
1 PERSONS OF THE DRAMA. MEN. Arden.
Young Arden.
Robinair.
Bruton.
Humphry , an old Servant in the Family of Arden.
Morgan , Servant.
Robert , Servant.
Gaolers, Servants, Countrymen, &c.
WOMEN. Mrs. Arden.
Madaline.
Scene, in London and the Vicinity.
[Page 113]
Main text ACT I. SCENE I. — Arden's House; Mrs. Arden discovered in a disconsolate posture, with Madaline hanging over her soothingly. MADALINE. Be not so overcome, my dear cousin; he has friends who will exert all their interest on his behalf.
MRS. ARDEN. Ay, ay! thou talkest like a child who believes every one as sincere and affectionate as herself. Who are they who interest themselves for the unfortunate? They who have daily conversed with him, laughed with him, gamed with him? who have daily quaffed wine at his table, and repeated every pleasantry that fell from his lips? (Shaking her head with an expression of bitter contempt.) My husband had many such friends!

[Page 114]
MADALINE. But you think too hardly of mankind: some one, even amongst them, will be found to stand up in his defence now in his hour of need. Robinair, for instance; he will bestir himself vigorously. He is in credit with people in power: he has always been warm in his expressions of friendship, I may say of admiration, for Mr. Arden. He will find means to influence them in his favour.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas, alas! does our hope hang on this point? I fear, indeed, that he has too much committed himself to this man: he hinted to me something of the kind, which, more than any other unfavourable [25]   circumstance, makes me tremble.
MADALINE. Why, how is this? I thought Robinair had been your friend, too. I have always understood, though I was then too young to be admitted into your confidence, that he was attached to you before you married. And has he not, ever since his return from abroad, befriended your husband in all the embarrassments into which his imprudence has thrown him?
MRS. ARDEN. Rather say that, in the bitterness of disappointment,
[Page 115]
he has haunted us like a malevolent spirit, to enjoy our misfortunes and distress.
MADALINE. Can he be so wicked?
MRS. ARDEN. Without being able directly to accuse him of one unfriendly office, something within my breast has always whispered this to me. But Arden, my poor Arden, thought otherwise; and it was the only thing that ever caused disagreement between us. I enjoyed the confidence of my husband till he became so intimate with him, and from that time I have been kept in the dark regarding all his schemes and transactions. Judge, then, with what heart I shall put my trust in Robinair!
MADALINE. Try him, however: put his friendship to the [50]   proof.
MRS. ARDEN. I mean to do so, Madaline: I have already sent to him, and expect him every moment. (Listening.) Is there not somebody coming?— A heavy footstep—his step! Now must I hold down this proud heart within me, and be supplicant to him whom I despise.

[Page 116]
Enter Bruton . Mr. Bruton! I expected, Sir, to have seen your friend.
BRUTON. Unavoidable business, Madam, prevents Mr. Robinair from waiting upon you: he cannot possibly come to this part of the town to-day; but he will be happy to have the honour of receiving you, at his own house, any hour in the forenoon which you may be pleased to appoint.
MRS. ARDEN. He says so? (A pause.) I ought not to be surprised at this message.—I shall wait upon him at half-past twelve. Perhaps I shall find more generosity in his nature than this message, or the misgivings of my own heart, seem to promise. (Looking earnestly at Bruton .) You are silent, Mr. Bruton: you make no rash promises for your friend.
BRUTON. I hope, Madam, you will not be disappointed in any good opinion you may form of him. [75]   I hope he will make every exertion in favour of Mr. Arden; but, in cases of this nature, all applications to royal benevolence, unless under very peculiar circumstances, have proved unsuccessful.

[Page 117]
MRS. ARDEN. Alas! I know that forgery is a crime which, in a commercial country, is rigorously dealt with; and if Arden is once condemned, notwithstanding his innocence, I shall be hopeless. It is the services of a friend regarding the evidence to be produced upon his trial that I would solicit from Mr. Robinair. No one is so capable as himself of rendering them effectually.
BRUTON. He is, indeed, active, sagacious, and acute. (Muttering words indistinctly.)
MRS. ARDEN. Yes, he has all the qualities you have named. —Half-past twelve, then, you think he will be at leisure?
BRUTON. Yes, Madam: good morning. (Going.)
MRS. ARDEN. Mr. Bruton! (Calling after him.)
BRUTON. Did you call me, Madam?
MRS. ARDEN. I beg pardon—there is nothing: good morning.

[Page 118]
BRUTON. Good morning, Lady. (Going as before, till almost off the Stage.)
MRS. ARDEN (stepping after him hastily). Mr. Bruton! forgive this irresolute weakness: I did call you. Oh, Sir! the wretched hope for succour where no claims exist,—even from the [100]   stranger and the unknown; and think that every look of pity comes from one who would befriend them. There was an expression on your face as you went; have I read it truly? Will you use your influence with Robinair for the unhappy? Although, I acknowledge, the sentiments I have felt and, perhaps, too strongly expressed for all those who, with Robinair, seemed engaged in drawing my husband into expensive and dangerous habits, do not entitle me to ask any favour of you .
BRUTON. Be assured, Madam, no remembrance of such expressions shall rest upon my mind at present; and if it is possible to be of any use to you, I will. Would to God I could serve you!
MRS. ARDEN. You can—you can! You can move him.
BRUTON. Move him!—I will try to do it; but, if he is
[Page 119]
to be moved, who can do it so powerfully as yourself? My best wishes are on your side.
                                         [Exit. MRS. ARDEN. “Move him!”—“if he is to be moved!” Didst thou mark with what a voice he uttered those words?
MADALINE. Nay, do not despair.
MRS. ARDEN. He knows the man. Oh, my unfortunate husband! And my son—my boy, my pride— [125]   must thou be the son of a condemned— (Bursting into tears.)
MADALINE. Do not bewail yourself thus, as if the worst had already befallen you. The storm will pass: the innocent will never be condemned, how strong soever the circumstances may be which make him at present suspected. And for your son, so far distant at school, he will know nothing of this terrible distress. How fortunate it is, poor boy, that he is absent! His affectionate and sensible heart would ill support itself against the dreadful shock.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas, poor fellow! he is conning over his daily tasks, and sporting with his careless playmates,
[Page 120]
and little dreams of the misery at home. O that he may never know it! Thank Heaven, however, that he is at present removed from it.
MADALINE. It is one fortunate circumstance amidst your many distresses. Do not suffer yourself to be so depressed; wrestle more bravely with your misfortunes, and Heaven will support and protect you.
MRS. ARDEN. I will try to do so.
MADALINE. This is well said: and, if I might advise you, retire for an hour to your chamber, and, if possible, take a little rest. You have been up the [150]   whole night, and it is still early in the morning. You will not else have strength to comfort him who so much wants your comfort.
MRS. ARDEN. I thank you, my kind Madaline; I will do as you desire me, though nowhere is there any rest for me.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 121]
SCENE II. An Ante-room. Enter Humphry and Robert , meeting. ROBERT. Art thou from the prison, Humphry?
HUMPHRY. Yes.
ROBERT. Hast thou seen our Master?
HUMPHRY. Yes.
ROBERT. Is he on the felon's side?
HUMPHRY (angrily). Yes.
ROBERT. Be there irons upon his legs?
HUMPHRY (pushing him away). No, beast; but I wish there were upon thy tongue.

[Page 122]
ROBERT. What makes you growl so at a body? Is there any harm in axing a question or two? for I wants hugely to know how he looks, and how he demeans himself upon it.
HUMPHRY. He demeans himself like a man; and how he looks, those may say who have courage enough to look at him. I saw no part of him higher than his waist.
ROBERT. Ah, poor gentleman! he was a good master to us, I must say that for him; and had it not been for those sharking fellows hanging about him so, eating up his substance through the day, and leading him to the gaming-house at night, he would have remained so, living in credit and honesty. His lady, poor woman! my heart [25]   grieves for her; and that fine lad, our young master, what will become of him?
HUMPHRY. Ay, generous boy! kindly boy! noble boy! it will pull hard at his high spirit, I warrant ye. He will be fifteen next Monday; and what a joyless birthday it will be!
ROBERT. Yes, man: he is so courteous and so gentle with us here; and yet they say at school, amongst
[Page 123]
his playfellows, he is the master boy of them all, and reigns over them as bravely as any prince.
HUMPHRY. Ay; woe is me for him!
ROBERT. It is well, howsomever, that he knows nothing of it at present. Evil comes soon enough, God wot.
HUMPHRY. Is my lady in her chamber?
ROBERT. I thought I heard a noise as if she were. (Both draw close to the side scene to listen.) They told me she was gone to lay down; but she may be stirring now.
Enter Young Arden by the opposite side. YOUNG ARDEN (aside). Ha! there's old Humphry and Robert confabbing together. I am taller since I left home, and they have never seen me in a coat of this fashion: I think I may play them a trick. (Pulling his hat over his eyes, and speaking in a feigned voice.) Pray, ye good Sirs, is young Mr. Arden at home?
HUMPHRY. [50]   No, Sir; have you any business with him? He's at school.

[Page 124]
YOUNG ARDEN. And he had better stay there, I trow, if he has not a mind for as sound a beating as ever fell to the share of a sorry jackanapes.
HUMPHRY. Sorry jackanapes, Sir! There is not a braver boy in the kingdom. He would think no more of chucking such a sneaking fellow as you into the kennel than I should of twisting round this junk of tobacco.
YOUNG ARDEN. Yes, to be sure, it becomes you to speak well of him, for the honour of the house you are in; but you know well enough that he is but a paltry fellow, who runs about the house and calls out “O dear!” if his finger be but scratched, that every body may pity him.
HUMPHRY. He is ready enough to pity any body; but scratch his own finger to the bone, ay, cut off his leg, an you please, and the devil himself will not make him call out “O dear!”
YOUNG ARDEN (casting away his hat, skipping across the room, and throwing his arms round Humphry's neck). My dear Humphry! my kind old Humphry! thou lovest me as much as ever, I see; and I
[Page 125]
might ride on thy shoulders still, were I not somewhat heavier now, and thou scarcely so strong. We have had happy days together, [75]   Humphry! and we'll have them again, though after a different fashion.
HUMPHRY. Ah, my dear child! what has brought you here?
YOUNG ARDEN. Our school has broke up suddenly, on account of a fever that has got into it. I thought I should come upon you by surprise. But how is this? You look strangely upon me.—And you too, Robert: are you not glad to see me? (A pause.) What is the matter? Is my father within?
HUMPHRY (making signs for Robert to be silent). No, he is not within—or, rather, he is not at home—or, that is to say, he has left his own house for a little time.
YOUNG ARDEN. And my mother, is she well?
HUMPHRY. Pretty well—so so.
YOUNG ARDEN. So so! Where is she?
HUMPHRY. Taking a short rest, I believe, in her own
[Page 126]
room. (Preventing Young Arden , who is hastening towards the door.) Nay! let her rest a little while before you go to her; and wait meantime in the library, where you will have books to amuse you.
YOUNG ARDEN. Be it so, then; but I cannot wait long. I want only to look upon her, but not to wake or [100]   disturb her.
                                         [Exit. HUMPHRY. How tall he has grown! he has the size of a man, and I'm sure he had always the spirit of one. Oh, how it will be put to the proof!
ROBERT. It makes a body quake to think of it. His own father to die the death of a—
HUMPHRY. I'll throttle thee if thou say another word about that!
ROBERT. Lord 'a mercy! one may not speak to you now about any thing that one cares most to speak about.
                                         [Exeunt severally.
[Page 127]
SCENE III. Mrs. Arden's Bed-chamber. She is discovered lying on a couch, as if asleep, with a shawl thrown over her face. Enter Young Arden , stepping softly on tiptoe. YOUNG ARDEN. Is she asleep? Her breast heaves under that covering, as if she slept soundly. (Going up to her.) All covered up so closely! Ha! here is a hand peeping out which I will press by and by right dearly. (Kneels, and bends over her hand, mimicking the action of kissing, but without touching it.) I can see her features, too, through these folds. (Putting his face close to hers, affectionately.) How surprised she will be when she wakes, and sees me by her! Does she not move? She is awake. (Lifting the shawl gently from her face.) Mother! my little dormouse mother!
MRS. ARDEN (shrieking, and starting up). Good God! art thou here, Edmond? Why art thou come? What brings thee? Hast thou heard any thing?
YOUNG ARDEN. Heard any thing? What should I hear? Has
[Page 128]
any thing happened? Where is my father? They tell me he has gone from home for a short time: where is he gone?
MRS. ARDEN. Yes, yes; he is gone from home. This house is not his home at present. (Bursting into tears and falling on his neck).
YOUNG ARDEN. My dearest mother! why this excess of grief? Where is he gone to? For God's sake! where is he gone to?
MRS. ARDEN. [25]   He is gone—they have put him—he is gone—
YOUNG ARDEN. To prison?
MRS. ARDEN. Even so, boy! thou hast guessed it. But, oh, think not hardly of him! He has been misled; he has been imprudent.
YOUNG ARDEN. Think hardly of him, mother! I would not think hardly of him, though I were turned to the streets for his sake, and left to beg my bread from door to door.
MRS. ARDEN. Oh, my child! what hast thou to go through!

[Page 129]
YOUNG ARDEN. Think not of me, dear mother; I can go through it all with a good heart.—But what will become of you till I am old enough to work for you?—Fie on't! I am old enough now: I am sound of life and limb, and I have spirit enough to face anything.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas, alas for thee!
YOUNG ARDEN. Fear not, fear not. I am a proud boy, it is true; but I will not be ashamed before any one when I am working for my mother.
MRS. ARDEN. My blessed child! and must this be thy portion?
YOUNG ARDEN. Yes, Madam, and an honourable one too. Cheer up, cheer up, my dear mother. I shall go [50]   to my father presently, and meet him with such a cheerful countenance, that he shall only wait for a discharge from his creditors, which they cannot refuse when he has given up all that he has,— to be a far happier man than he was before.
MRS. ARDEN. Oh! oh! thou little thinkest what thou hast before thee!

[Page 130]
YOUNG ARDEN. Nay, say not “Oh! oh!” I have looked forward to this for some time, and have hardened myself to meet it. I saw well enough, schoolboy as I was, what the gaming-table and his numberless expenses would lead him to.
MRS. ARDEN. And didst thou think of him thus?
YOUNG ARDEN. Yes, I did, mother; but I loved him, nevertheless, and will love him still.—Be composed, then, I beseech you, and let me run to him immediately.
MRS. ARDEN (holding him). Not now, not now! Stay with me, and tell me why thou hast come to us so unexpectedly.
YOUNG ARDEN. That can soon be told.—But here is Madaline. Well, cousin; you are come to welcome me? (Holding out his hand.)
Enter Madaline . MADALINE. I was told you were here.
YOUNG ARDEN. And this is the rueful face you put on for my
[Page 131]
welcome. Fie, Madaline! you should cheer my [75]   mother, and look pleasantly before her.
MRS. ARDEN. Don't reproach her: she is very kind and very considerate. Without her, I should sink altogether.
YOUNG ARDEN. Then, she is a good girl, and shall be chidden no more.
MADALINE. We shall make up this difference in the next room, where I have ordered some refreshment for you; and you must eat something after your journey, and persuade my aunt to do so, too. You must both eat, if you would not sink under entirely.
YOUNG ARDEN. I thank you, kind cousin, and so we will. Sink under, sayest thou? No, no! we shan't do that, God willing. There is more spirit in us than that comes to;—is there not, mother? (Taking her arm under his as they go off.)
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 132]
ACT II. SCENE I. — Bruton's Lodgings. Robinair and Bruton , speaking as they enter. ROBINAIR. And you are just come from hearing Arden's examination? How went it?
BRUTON. It was scarcely closed when I came away,— as I thought you would be waiting for me; but I heard all the material part.
ROBINAIR. And how did he behave himself?
BRUTON. With greater caution and presence of mind than I should have supposed a character like his, depressed with a sense of disgrace, was capable of.
ROBINAIR. Indeed! He kept possession of himself, then?
BRUTON. Wonderfully: he has not betrayed himself in one of his answers, though he was questioned very shrewdly.

[Page 133]
ROBINAIR. Ha! where have those brains been stored up all this while, which he now brings into use for the first time? “Call no man happy till he be dead,” says the old proverb. We must now add some words to it: Call no man a fool till the same seal has been set upon him.
BRUTON. Ay; strong necessity will make a man wise as well as bold. But your dislike to Arden made you undervalue his abilities.
ROBINAIR. Devil take him and them both!—Not once [25]   off his guard?
BRUTON. Not once, as far as I could judge of the matter. It will be proved, indeed, that, a few days previous to the date of the forgery, he purchased at the stationer's with whom old Fenshaw deals, that peculiar kind of paper upon which the old gentleman always writes his money bills,—a kind which he had never purchased before: but this circumstance is not very conclusive, since Fenshaw acknowledges giving him a bill of the same date, though for a much smaller sum. Now the old gentleman's memory is impaired, and he may easily be supposed to have set down, in mistake, one sum for another. Your having seen the real bill is the only circumstance that
[Page 134]
makes positively against him. His life, therefore, is in your hands.
ROBINAIR. I know it is. Now is my time of revenge for all the scorn, for all the insults, I have endured from that proud woman.
BRUTON. And is it generous to use it?
ROBINAIR. Generous! and hast thou kept company with me all these years, Bruton, to talk so like a simpleton as thou dost? I have carried myself with a show of specious sentiments to the world; as every [50]   man must do who is not a fool, and intends to live with some credit in it. I have been the delicate, the liberal, the good, and, above all, the good-natured Mr. Robinair, to many; but when did I ever pretend to refinement or generosity before thee?
BRUTON. I cannot, indeed, greatly accuse thee of it. But the present case is so very distressing.
ROBINAIR. It is so; I apprehend as much, good Mr. Bruton.
BRUTON. But you have lived upon poor Arden; you
[Page 135]
have encouraged him in all kinds of extravagance.
ROBINAIR. Well, Sir, this has not escaped my memory.
BRUTON. You have enticed him to the gaming table, and ruined him.
ROBINAIR. Well; of this, also, I have some recollection.
BRUTON. And your lax doctrines respecting money transactions have, I doubt not, suggested to him, that robbing an old relation of what he could easily spare, and of what, in the course of a few years, would probably be his own by right, could scarcely be considered as a crime.
ROBINAIR. Thou sayest truth: I have done all this. And wherefore have I done it, thinkest thou? For the paltry gains to be made from the ruin of [75]   a man of moderate fortune?— I , who had talents to have speculated on a much grander scale? Out upon thy little narrow conceptions!
BRUTON. Nay, I knew that revenge for disappointed passion had a good share in all your manœuvres.

[Page 136]
ROBINAIR. Sharp-witted fellow! thou knowest that I loved his wife, and was rejected by her, who preferred this fool to me; that I went abroad in disgust, and, upon my return, insinuated myself into his confidence, with the hope of sowing discord between them, and, if possible, of undermining her fidelity. Thou knowest she has still treated me with disdain, so that nothing but his complete ruin can possibly detach her from him;—thou knowest all this, yet hast the folly to stand before me, with that piteous countenance of thine, desiring me seriously to undo all I have been labouring for so long. Will the wolf, with the prey in his fangs, forbear to devour it, because, forsooth, he will be called an unamiable wolf?
BRUTON. I would have you at least to consider—
ROBINAIR. No! good, compassionate Mr. Bruton: I have considered, and I will not save him. On the scaffold let him die! and let those who have suffered within them the torments that I have endured [100]   condemn me, if they can. It is not by calm, even-tempered dozers through life, such as thou art, that I will submit to be judged.
BRUTON. Then, by my faith, Robinair, thou art a fiend!

[Page 137]
ROBINAIR. Better be a fiend only, than fiend and fool both. I am a man of more simplicity than thou art; I do not try to have so many contrary qualities at once. Sound no more of that piteous nonsense in my ears!
BRUTON. Pity, indeed, seems out of use at present. Who could have thought that old man would have prosecuted the life of one who, though distantly related to him, is still his nearest of kin! Some secret enemy has goaded him to it.
ROBINAIR. And thou art at a loss, I doubt not, to guess who this wicked enemy may be; judging, as thou dost, in all the imbecility of innocence. (Smiling on him with malignant contempt.)
Bruton (shrinking from him in disgust). I understand that smile.
ROBINAIR. Thou hast understanding enough for that, hast thou?—But do not imagine, however, that I am entirely destitute of every good disposition. I intend, when I am in possession of old Fenshaw's fortune, which he has promised to bequeath to me, to be liberal, and even generous, both to Mrs. Arden and her son. When she is
[Page 138]
[125]   in my power I will treat her nobly; but she must be in my power.
BRUTON. I have no more to say to you; my pleading is at an end.
ROBINAIR. I am glad to hear it. And now, dropping this subject, which must never again be resumed, let me remind you of the business you are to transact for me at the other end of the town. I have ordered my carriage to meet me here, and it is just drawing up at the door. (Hasting away, and returning.) Half-past twelve, I think, is the time Mrs. Arden has appointed?
BRUTON. Yes, it is the time she fixed.
ROBINAIR. I must hurry home, then.
                                         [Exit. BRUTON (alone). And this is the man to whom my cursed extravagance has subjected me, while, having me in his power, he treats me like a menial—like a slave! Oh, thou vice of gaming! thou hast overthrown thy thousands and tens of thousands, never to rise again—never again to bear themselves with the erect dignity of an honest man!
                                         [Exit.
[Page 139]
SCENE II. An open Hall or Lobby in a Prison, from which a wide arched passage branches off. Over the arch is written, “The Felons' Side.” Enter Young Arden , meeting the Head Gaoler . GAOLER. Did you look for any one, young gentleman?
YOUNG ARDEN. I am wrong, I see. Can you show me the way to the debtors' side? There is a prisoner I would inquire after.
GAOLER (pointing in another direction). That, Sir, will lead you to it: but you had better stop here a few minutes; for yonder are persons coming this way, conducting a prisoner from examination,—a poor unfortunate gentleman.
YOUNG ARDEN. A gentleman! what is his name?
GAOLER. His name is Arden.
YOUNG ARDEN (aside). Examination! is it a meeting with creditors he means?

[Page 140]
GAOLER. Yonder he comes, poor man!
YOUNG ARDEN. You seem to pity him very much.
GAOLER. It always grieves me to see a gentleman in his situation.
YOUNG ARDEN. You have a kind heart, Sir; but misfortunes will happen to persons in every rank of life?
GAOLER. Here he is, and his friends and counsel with him.
YOUNG ARDEN (aside, and shrinking back). I'll stand behind; I cannot go up to him before those people.
Enter Arden , with his Counsel, &c., and walks slowly across the Stage, passing close by his Son, who keeps behind the Gaoler, casting a furtive look at his Father's face as he passes; then, seeing him about to enter the Felons' Passage, springs forward eagerly, as if to prevent him. GAOLER (pulling him back). What would you?
YOUNG ARDEN. He is going the wrong way!

[Page 141]
GAOLER. [25]   He is right enough.
YOUNG ARDEN. That is the felons' side!
GAOLER. And therefore it is his.
YOUNG ARDEN. Thou liest!
GAOLER. What say you?
YOUNG ARDEN. He is no felon!
GAOLER. That will be known when his trial is ended.
YOUNG ARDEN. What trial?
GAOLER. His trial, that comes on to-morrow, for a forgery. ( Young Arden sinks to the ground; Gaoler, beckoning to the Under-Gaoler to assist him.) Poor lad! this has struck through his heart like an arrow. He must be some near relation to the prisoner.
UNDER GAOLER. His son; I'll pawn my life on't!

[Page 142]
GAOLER. Ah, poor boy! (Chafes his hands and temples, and Young Arden recovers.) My good young Sir, go into my house for a while and recover yourself.
YOUNG ARDEN. There was a wonderful buzzing of voices round me.
GAOLER. There was nobody spoke to you but myself; and I spoke softly, too.
YOUNG ARDEN. I must go to my father.
GAOLER. Yes, presently; but not till you are better recovered. Beside, he is engaged at present [50]   with gentlemen, who are assisting him to prepare for his trial.
YOUNG ARDEN. His trial! Oh, oh!—But he is innocent!
GAOLER. Yes, my good boy; we hope so: and then there is no fear of him.
UNDER GAOLER. The innocent are never condemned in this country.

[Page 143]
YOUNG ARDEN. Ah! were that but certain, he would be safe.
GAOLER. Then he is safe: so, cheer up, my sweet young Sir; and come with me to my house, hard by, till his counsel have left him.—How came you here without a conductor?
YOUNG ARDEN. My mother desired me not to go till she could be with me; but I was impatient, and stole out of the house as soon as she left it to execute some business elsewhere. Alas! I see now why she forbade me to go.
                                         [Exeunt. SCENE III. Robinair's House. Enter Mrs. Arden , and a Servant showing her in. SERVANT (placing a chair). My master will attend you immediately, Madam.
                                         [Exit. MRS. ARDEN (alone). And here I am in the house of this man, a humble supplicant for his pity! Righteous
[Page 144]
Heaven! sunk thus low in misery, give me strength to support it! If I have been haughty or elated in prosperity, teach me now resignation in adversity!—I hear him coming.—Ah! do I feel pride still? No, no, no! what have I to do with feelings like these, when I am pleading for the life of my husband?
Enter Robinair . ROBINAIR. Madam, I have kept myself at home in obedience to your appointment.
MRS. ARDEN. I thank you, Sir, for paying so much regard to one so very miserable. I come to you, Mr. Robinair, a depressed and wretched suitor.
ROBINAIR. Is there any thing, in any situation, that Mrs. Arden will deign to desire of me?
MRS. ARDEN. There is, there is! there is something I must desire—I must beg—I must beseech of you; and I will not do your friendship for Arden the injury to suppose it possible that you should refuse me.
ROBINAIR. I am infinitely honoured by your good opinion, [25]   Madam. In what can I possibly serve you?

[Page 145]
MRS. ARDEN. O tell me first—tell me faithfully and truly, what is your opinion of my husband's situation. He has been very imprudent, but it cannot be that he is guilty.
ROBINAIR. Imprudence leads men into great temptation. You know whether or not the character of your husband made him more likely than other men to resist it.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas! I know well the weakness of his mind, and I know his necessities were great: but great as they might be, they could never move him to commit such a crime.
ROBINAIR. So do all good wives conceive of their husbands' integrity; particularly those who have enjoyed the felicity of a romantic attachment. How happy should I be to feel equally confident on this point.
MRS. ARDEN. Then you are not? O, no, no! you cannot believe him guilty, how strongly soever appearances may be against him.
ROBINAIR. I wish it were possible for me to hold your faith upon this subject, Madam, or even to avoid
[Page 146]
the necessity I may be under of appearing on his trial, as the principal witness against him.
MRS. ARDEN. [50]   Merciful Heaven! and do you walk about at liberty, waiting here to give the death-blow to him whom you have called your friend? Fly, fly, I beseech you! On my knees I beseech you to have pity on us. Fly this country for a season, and conceal the place of your retreat.
ROBINAIR. Pray, Madam, do not give me the pain of seeing you in that posture.
MRS. ARDEN. No posture but this till you have granted my request! Have pity on us! Fly the country, or conceal yourself immediately, and we will bless you. (Still kneeling, and catching hold of the skirts of his coat, as he retreats from her.)
ROBINAIR. I will not listen to another word while you remain thus. (Placing a chair for her; they both sit down.)
MRS. ARDEN. Then you will listen to me now: you will consent to fly, or conceal yourself, till the trial is over.
ROBINAIR. Are you aware, Madam, that you are desiring
[Page 147]
me to become an exile, an outlaw? to destroy my own character and credit in the world? Your many kind instances of regard for my happiness may indeed merit a grateful return, but something short of this (ironically) . Command my services in any other way. My fortune is at your disposal. I will be the protector of yourself [75]   and of your son.
MRS. ARDEN (starting from her seat). Heaven forbid! thy protection were the venomous coilings— (checking herself, and covering her face with her hands) .
ROBINAIR. Of a serpent, you would have said. But, pray, speak without reserve, that we may understand one another completely. My protection is not, perhaps, what you would voluntarily have chosen; but, when no better expedient presents itself, it may possibly be endured. Ay, Madam, and shall be endured, if you hope for any favour for your husband, whom it is in my power to save, without flying the country. Must I commit perjury to please you, whilst your marriage vow, the bane of all my happiness, remains unbroken? Must I be the sinner, and you still continue immaculate? (After a pause, in which she seems strongly agitated.) Take this into your consideration, Lady. I shall sleep to-night in
[Page 148]
my house near Chelsea, where, if you will have the condescension to come yourself, and acquaint me with your determination, I shall think myself honoured.—Excuse me now; I am exceedingly hurried with business. Let me have the pleasure of attending you to your chair, Letitia; I once called you by that dear name (taking her hand familiarly) .
MRS. ARDEN (pulling away her hand indignantly). [100]   Insulting, detestable villain! let one general ruin overwhelm us all, before I owe any thing to thee. (Hurrying from him.)
                                         [Exit. ROBINAIR (looking after her significantly). Yes; pride must make some blustering, before he be entirely turned out of doors: this is but reasonable, and according to the working of nature. Yes, yes, yes! there will be time enough between this and midnight to smooth the haughty brow into submission. (Walking hastily up and down, and stopping now and then as he speaks.) Now will the days of thy scorn be remembered with bitterness, when, wife to a degraded husband, thou lookest timidly up to the eyes of a protector—even him whom thou hast rejected with disdain.—Let this once be, and I shall feel it worth all the—No; I will not call it villany
[Page 149]
—my provocations would justify any thing —all the artful management it has cost me.
Re-enter Mrs. Arden , with mortified timidity. MRS. ARDEN. You will be at Chelsea to-night?
ROBINAIR. Yes, Lady, where I shall be delighted to see you, and to obey your commands.                                          [Exit Mrs. Arden . (Holding up his hands exultingly.) I knew it would be so! There was a rude burst of anger, to be sure; but the vision of a man's bare throat, with a noose about it, has crossed her in the hall, and checked her wayward steps.—Ho, there!
Enter a Servant. [125]   Send notice to the housekeeper at Chelsea that—No, I must write down her directions, else there will be some cursed mistake or other. (Goes to a table, and sits down to write, while the Servant waits.)
Enter Bruton . BRUTON. You are engaged I see.
ROBINAIR. No, no! I'll speak to you immediately.

[Page 150]
BRUTON (aside). What is he about now? No good, I'm sure, from the eagerness of his eye, and that ironical twisting of his mouth.
ROBINAIR (after sealing the note, and giving it to the Servant). Bid Charles carry that to Mrs. Cookum without delay.
                                         [Exit Servant, and Robinair comes forward to Bruton with a gay, light step. BRUTON. You are not surely going to Chelsea to-night.
ROBINAIR. But I am; and I tell thee besides, as surely, that thou art going with me.
BRUTON. Indeed! I am engaged elsewhere.
ROBINAIR. Let the elsewhere forego thy gracious presence for this bout. Thou art engaged to me.
BRUTON. Something too arbitrary, methinks.
ROBINAIR. O! displeased, I see! Come, come; do not be a restive fool upon my hands, when I want thee confoundedly. For I must be in waiting there before the hour; and I hate to wait alone.

[Page 151]
BRUTON. For whom.
ROBINAIR. She who has the prettiest hand and foot of any woman in England; she who has haunted, and scorned, and tormented me for almost the half [150]   of my life; for Arden's wife. I have an appointment with her at midnight.
BRUTON. You do not say so,—you cannot say so. Has misery driven her to this?
ROBINAIR. We shall see—you shall see.
BRUTON. I cannot believe it.
ROBINAIR. Be as sceptical and as cautious as you please; but go with me to Chelsea in the evening, and let seeing and believing be yoke-follows.
BRUTON. I will not go.—Nay, I will go to see you disappointed. You deceive yourself: she cannot have fallen so low.
ROBINAIR. Ay, she was lofty enough once. But the lark cannot be always in the clouds; the heavy rain beats upon her wings, and down she drops upon
[Page 152]
the wet sod, where earth-grubs and snails are her neighbours.—Disappointed, ha! ha! ha!— But I have other things which thou must do for me in the mean time—nay, don't scowl so— things that must be done.—Ha! here comes Beacham's man with the money.
Enter a Person, with a small bag. BRUTON (aside, as he turns from Robinair ). Domineering insolence! it is insufferable.
ROBINAIR (to the Stranger). Good morning, Mr. Martin; how is your master? You have brought, I see, the little sum that was left unsettled between us. He is an [175]   honourable fellow. But thou shakest thy head, man; thou lookest ruefully.
STRANGER. Come honesty first, and honour will follow.
ROBINAIR. Fogh! some old saw of your grandmother's; quite out of date now, my good friend. Look not so grum at me: there is something to make thee more cheerful. (Offering him money with one hand, while he receives the bag with the other.)
STRANGER. I'll have nothing of yours, Sir.

[Page 153]
ROBINAIR. No! good gold pieces are not to be despised.
STRANGER. Be they gold or copper it is the same to me.
                                         [Exit. ROBINAIR (laughing). What think you of this angry fool, Bruton?
BRUTON. He has cause to be angry. You have stripped the coat from the back of his poor silly master.
ROBINAIR. Well; he will go to Paris in his waistcoat. He may find it the fashion there, perhaps, to go so clothed.
BRUTON. And how long will he keep his waistcoat when he gets amongst the worthies of the Palais Royal?
ROBINAIR. What does that signify? The thick waters of the Seine will make him coat vest, and winding-sheet, all in one, with no more to do about the matter.
Enter a Man, with papers, &c. Oh, ho! Mr. Skriever; you are come at last with the deeds.

[Page 154]
SKRIEVER. [200]   Yes, Sir, and you will find the security good, and the interest of your money regularly paid.
ROBINAIR. I trust so; for otherwise I shall foreclose upon you without hesitation. Go into my library, and I'll sign it there.                                          [Exit Skriever by a side door. (To Bruton , after going about the room fantastically, with a gay, skipping step.) The breezes of fortune, you see, are in my sails.
BRUTON. But you may be wrecked full soon, notwithstanding.
ROBINAIR. Never fear: I am a skilful pilot as well as a bold sailor, and when I am—O what may I not be!—I will make a man of thee, Bruton.
BRUTON. Could you restore me to the man I was, when you first took me up, I should ask no better fortune, and take my leave of you for ever.
ROBINAIR. What! leave me? No, no! I must not part with that sober face, and seeming sanctity of thine: they will be necessary to keep me in credit with the world. “Hold your tongue,” will the faded maids and dowagers exclaim, as
[Page 155]
they arrange their cards, “I will not hear one word against Sir John Robinair, as long as he is so intimate with good Mr. Bruton.”
BRUTON. Sir John Robinair!
ROBINAIR. Yes; I shall be a baronet by and by, you know. There will be nothing very wonderful [225]   in that, surely. But I waste time here: I must go and sign those deeds.
                                         [Exit into the side door. BRUTON. He is mad with prosperity. But pride comes before a fall; and may the proverb be verified here!
                                         [Exit.
[Page 156]
ACT III. The Prison; Arden is discovered sitting in a disconsolate posture. After a pause, he rises, and walks once or twice across the front of the Stage. ARDEN. And if it should come to this, in what is it really different from that which, many times, in the accumulation of my distresses, I have wished for—I have almost been upon the brink of perpetrating? How often, after returning in despair from the gaming-house, have I wistfully looked at the pistols that hung on the wall, or the razor that lay on my table!—Ah! but disgrace, disgrace! The murmurs of detestation and pity; the broad gaze of the innumerable multitude; the last horrible act imposed on a passive wretch;—this is what the human mind strongly recoils from! this is dreadful! (Sinks down again upon his seat.)
Enter Under Gaoler , bearing a covered dish, &c. UNDER GAOLER. I have brought you something to eat, Sir: you will be quite faint if you fast longer.

[Page 157]
ARDEN. Take it away, friend; I cannot eat yet.
UNDER GAOLER. Pray, Sir, be advised. If it were but a single morsel, it would do you good.
ARDEN. Take it away—take it away, I pray thee. Why art thou so importunate?
UNDER GAOLER. There is a young gentleman below, who wishes to see you, and my master is anxious you should take some refreshment before he comes to you; just, as it were, to strengthen you first.
ARDEN (starting up). [25]   A young gentleman, said ye? A boy, do you mean?
UNDER GAOLER. Yes, Sir, one of your good, manly, gentleman-like school-boys; but wonderfully out of heart, poor fellow.
ARDEN. Good God! Show him up immediately.
UNDER GAOLER. Yes, Sir; but will you not take a little wine first, if you will eat nothing?

[Page 158]
ARDEN. No, no, kind fool! it would choke me. Show him up immediately.                                          [Exit Gaoler . Now do I feel all my miseries! Now am I the selfish, the cruel, the disgraceful father. O God! O God! what is the gaze of a multitude to this boy's eye?
Enter Young Arden , who, running up to his father, falls upon his neck, and bursts into tears. ARDEN. Boy, boy! why hast thou come to me?
YOUNG ARDEN. To bless you, father.
ARDEN. To bless me, boy?
YOUNG ARDEN. Ay, and to cling to you, father: to be with you and serve you, father; who should do that, as you are now circumstanced, but me?
ARDEN. Woe is me! that thou shouldst have such an office! It must not be.
YOUNG ARDEN. Turn not away from me thus! I am now at your feet in a posture you have never seen me take before. (Kneeling and catching his hand.)

[Page 159]
ARDEN. [50]   I know thee well: thou art a generous boy; thou art a noble boy; but what a father am I? I have blasted thy fair promise, freshly springing plant! I have blighted thee with disgrace!
YOUNG ARDEN. Say not so, my dear father! what ruin is there to him who has a sound mind and a sound body left, and is willing to be a poor man, since Heaven pleases not that he should be a rich one? And for disgrace, I shall think it no disgrace to be the son of an unfortunate father, knowing that he is only unfortunate. Look not on me then with such anguish! You will be able to vindicate your character to the world. ( Arden shakes his head.) Nay, and if all the world regard you as guilty, I will believe you to be innocent.
ARDEN. Oh, oh, oh! This is misery indeed.
YOUNG ARDEN. Why that terrible groan, dear father?
ARDEN. Thou wringest my heart, my son!—Little dost thou know—but thou shalt know it. I have kept thy mother in ignorance, but I will
[Page 160]
conceal nothing from thee. (Going to the door to see if it be closely shut.)
YOUNG ARDEN. Good heaven! what is it you would tell me?
ARDEN. The fatal progress of a ruined unfortunate man.
YOUNG ARDEN. [75]   I know you are unfortunate.
ARDEN. Hold thy peace, and hear me out.—Naturally thoughtless and profuse, and fond of the pitiful distinction that expense bestows, I dissipated an easy fortune which ought to have been thine, Edmond.
YOUNG ARDEN. Nay, nay! take no thought of that: let it go. It is but a feather in the air; and may light where it lists.
ARDEN. Having squandered it, as I said, that false friend Robinair—
YOUNG ARDEN. Is he false?
ARDEN. False, base, and treacherous.

[Page 161]
YOUNG ARDEN. May he be sent to perdition then!
ARDEN. Be quiet, be quiet, and hear me out. That false friend, who had insinuated himself into my confidence, by many flattering praises and professions of regard, and by sometimes accommodating me with small loans of money, which I still hoped to repay, introduced me to the gambling table. There I was at first allowed to be successful, and encouraged to risk still higher stakes: at last a tide of ill luck, as it was called, set strongly against me, and I was borne down to ruin and despair.
YOUNG ARDEN. [100]   O what you must have suffered, father!
ARDEN. I was not a very happy man, Edmond; and when I thought of your mother and you—
YOUNG ARDEN. Nay, nay! say nothing of this. We shall do very well: we are satisfied.
ARDEN. I will go on with my story. Being thus desperate, I wrote to my old relation Fenshaw for the loan of a thousand pounds, which I sincerely meant to repay, whenever I should have it in my power.

[Page 162]
YOUNG ARDEN. I knew it, Sir: I knew you would willingly wrong no man.
ARDEN. Nay, listen. Fenshaw, suspecting the state of my affairs, but pitying my distress, sent me, indeed, a bill on his banker, but it was only for a hundred pounds, which was nothing to my necessities. I had, formerly, to amuse myself, imitated different kinds of hand-writing, and once,—this is the circumstance that, if brought in evidence, along with another only known to Robinair, would have the strongest effect on the decision of a jury; namely, his having seen the bill which Fenshaw sent me. Nothing was concealed from him. Once, after copying a note of Fenshaw's so exactly that it could not be discovered [125]   from the original, I showed it to Robinair and said, “This may be a resource to me in time of need.”
YOUNG ARDEN (eagerly). But you said it only in jest?
ARDEN. I did so then: but ruin overwhelmed me; I had no resource, and a strong temptation took hold of me. To convert this bill for a hundred into one for a thousand pounds, seemed so easily done; and still, like a madman, confident of retrieving
[Page 163]
all if I were but once more enabled to attempt fortune, I thought I should contrive to repay the sum, before the fraud could be discovered. This fatal idea came into my head in my despair, was rejected, yet still returned to me again, and, at last, an irresistible temptation fastened itself upon my miserable imbecility.
YOUNG ARDEN (in a half-choked voice). But you resisted it?
ARDEN. Alas! I did not. ( Young Arden staggers back some paces, then sinks down upon a chair, and from that upon the ground, where he throws himself along, covering his face with his hands, while Arden strides to and fro on the front of the Stage, in violent agitation.)
Enter Mrs. Arden . MRS. ARDEN (to her husband, not perceiving her son, who is partly concealed by the chair from which he sank). Ha! how is it now? Thou art more overcome than I have ever seen thee before. Alas! if thy strength fail thee now, when thou hast such exertions to make, what will become of us?
ARDEN. Let me alone—let me alone: thoughts of unutterable anguish are dealing with me.

[Page 164]
MRS. ARDEN. Alas! alas! I thought to have brought thee [150]   comfort.
ARDEN. What comfort? Where is it?
MRS. ARDEN. I went in quest of it, but I have returned empty. He is inexorable.
ARDEN. O! I remember now. Thou hast been with Robinair then?
MRS. ARDEN. Yes; I am come from his house, where I have knelt and wept at his feet.
ARDEN. And he is inexorable?
MRS. ARDEN. There is nothing to hope for from him. He has talked of befriending me and my son; but for thee he has no pity. He has talked, indeed, as if certain compliances on my part might have power to move him in your behalf, and desired me to acquaint him with my determination this night at his house near Chelsea; but there was a malignant mockery on his face, as he spoke, which made me regard what he said as an unworthy insult, that had no serious meaning.

[Page 165]
ARDEN. But it had a meaning,—a damned meaning. My life is in his power, and he had the audacity, even to me, to propose that which, were I but to utter it, would cover us both with shame.
MRS. ARDEN. Let it not then be uttered! Thou hast rejected the detestable proposal with abhorrence: [175]   I know thou hast; and, for the rest, let Heaven in its mercy send us deliverance. ( Arden groans.) O! how is this? Where is that vehemence of indignation? Surely thou hast rejected it with abhorrence!
ARDEN. I did reject it with abhorrence, and I do so still. But, oh! Letitia! there are moments when the thoughts of public disgrace; of the last dreadful act of dying on a scaffold, a spectacle to the unfeeling multitude, does so terribly beset my imagination, that, were it possible to endure the idea of thy degradation, I could almost—
YOUNG ARDEN (who has been eagerly listening, raising himself meantime from the ground by degrees, now springs upon his feet, and rushing between his father and mother, separates them vehemently with his thrown-out arms). But it is impossible.
MRS. ARDEN (to her son). Ha! art thou here?

[Page 166]
ARDEN (to his son, who is looking fixedly upon him). Take off thine eyes from me, boy; they strike me to the earth. Look not so on one whom thou hast called thy father. I know the spirit that is in thee, and, alas! I know that it is none of mine. Thou hast clung round my knees, and the first word of thy lips has been my name; thou hast clung to my side, and appeared to belong to me, but the soul that is in thee claims a far higher descent; thou shouldst have been the son of a nobler father. Yet strike me not to the earth in my wretchedness: I can bear [200]   any degradation but this.
YOUNG ARDEN. Father, father! speak not such words of humiliation: they are in my heart like daggers; they pierce it to the core. If I have looked at you as I ought not to have looked, punish me as you will, but, oh! not in this manner! Give me any other chastisement! You are the father that Heaven has given me, and I will be your son in riches and poverty; in honour and disgrace.
ARDEN. My noble, my generous boy! Oh, the curse of my unutterable folly! What a proud father I might have been! But now—No, no! change thy name, and let no creature know who it was that gave thee being. Let me die the
[Page 167]
death of a malefactor: it will be horrible, but it will be short.
YOUNG ARDEN. May you not yet be saved?
ARDEN. I ask it not now: I am resigned, if thou canst save thyself from infamy, and wilt blot out from thy remembrance that a weak wish for life did once for a moment betray me into unworthy thoughts.
MRS. ARDEN. O God! and is there no deliverance for thee? Can any thing be a crime that saves thy life?
ARDEN. Speak not of this again. The degrading wish [225]   which I have torn from my breast, shall return to it no more. Be calm, be resigned, my dear Latitia: there is no deliverance.
YOUNG ARDEN (after a thoughtful pause, springing up the air.) But there is—there is deliverance!
ARDEN. What keen voice of exclamation is this? Art thou beside thyself?
YOUNG ARDEN. No; but I am beyond myself. I am more than myself. The strength of a man thrills along
[Page 168]
my new-strung limbs, and with it there is deliverance for thee. (Running hastily to the door.)
ARDEN. What dost thou mean? Where art thou running to, Edmond?
MRS. ARDEN. Come back, come back, child: thou shalt not leave us.
YOUNG ARDEN. Oh, call me not back! Let me be for this one day unquestioned, and free from control, and all my life after I am subject to your will.
ARDEN. Knowest thou of any interest to be moved? of any means that we are ignorant of?
YOUNG ARDEN. Yes, father; and ignorant you must be. Let me go, I beseech you: I have a thing in my head, and with you I dare no longer remain.
ARDEN. This is a strangely sudden thought.
MRS. ARDEN. When shall I see thee again? I shall be at home in an hour or two.
YOUNG ARDEN. [250]   But I sha'n't return to you then.

[Page 169]
MRS. ARDEN. Before dark, at least, I may expect you?
YOUNG ARDEN. I sha'n't return so soon.
MRS. ARDEN. Good Heavens! when shall I see thee?
YOUNG ARDEN. Enquire not about me, I beseech you! After midnight, perhaps—but rise not when I knock at the door. In the morning—daylight will be dawning on the sky when I see you again. Farewell, farewell! and may heaven have pity upon us!
                                         [Exit hastily. MRS. ARDEN (running after him). I cannot let him go: there is something in his words that alarm me.
ARDEN (pulling her back). Do not go after him, nor prevent him from following his own generous impulse, noble creature! There is some person whom he hopes to interest strongly in my favour;—some of his school-fellows, perhaps, connected with people in power. It is vain, indeed; yet let him follow his own ideas. He will have satisfaction afterwards in having made the attempt.
MRS. ARDEN. Pray Heaven it be so! I have strange fear
[Page 170]
upon me that I cannot account for. 'Tis like a presentiment: I have become superstitious.— What if I should see him no more?
ARDEN. Do not give way to it, my dear love! Misery [275]   makes us all superstitious. Enter Gaoler . Does any body wish to see me?
GAOLER. Your Counsel, Sir, are returned; and as you are permitted to use the next apartment, where there is better accommodation than here, I have shown them into it, and they wait for you.
ARDEN. I will come to them immediately.                                          [Exit Gaoler .) Leave me then, my dear Letitia, and keep up your heart, if you can. I shall see you again in the evening.—God bless and support you, under the sad trials which my sins and follies have brought upon you!
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 171]
ACT IV. Scene A green Lawn, with Borders of Flowers, in front of Robinair's House, near Chelsea. Moonlight. Enter Robinair and Bruton from the house. ROBINAIR. The night air is cool and refreshing here: it is stifling to sit in that close library, which you are so fond of. (Walking quickly up and down, and sometimes stopping to listen.)
BRUTON. Yet you give yourself no time to enjoy it. Is that hurried pace the motions of one who comes forth to breathe the still air of evening? There is a sky, too, over your head, with that peaceful, brilliant moon shining from it, to which the dullest eye might be turned with a species of devotion, yet you look not up once to behold it.
ROBINAIR. This vile state of suspense! Who thinks of moon, clouds, or sky, when enduring it? (Listening.) I hear a footstep coming up the lane.

[Page 172]
BRUTON. My ears are less quick; I hear nothing: and if you are come out to listen for the arrival of her whom you expect, you will have the cool air about you long enough, I believe.
ROBINAIR. What! think you she will not come?
BRUTON. I am almost certain she will not.
ROBINAIR. Thou little knowest how the proud may be subdued by distress.
BRUTON. If I have any true knowledge of Arden, with all his weakness and folly, he will not submit to be saved by such base means as you propose.
ROBINAIR. [25]   Pshaw, pshaw! thou art too simple; contemptibly simple. The love of life works powerfully in stronger minds than his. Besides, the lady may be willing to save him without his consent. She, depend upon it, will be here by and by.
BRUTON. You are very sanguine.
ROBINAIR. Not unreasonably so: she will be here ere
[Page 173]
long. And then that eye of pride, those lips of scorn, that step of haughty defiance—ay, then shall I see them changed—changed into humble, abashed, submissive gentleness. This will be triumph! this will be happiness! yea, that very thing, happiness, which I have been pursuing all my life, and have never yet overtaken.
BRUTON. And so you confess, after all your successes in life, the fools you have cajoled, the dangers you have escaped, the sums you have amassed, the passions you have gratified, that happiness is a thing which has still escaped you?
ROBINAIR. Yes, Bruton, in some cursed way or other it still has escaped me.
BRUTON. But you are resolved to make sure of it now, by becoming the object of concealed detestation to one whose open disdain has so long and so [50]   sorely galled you?
ROBINAIR. Well, be it so! be it so! let her detest me as she will; but she shall, nevertheless, be the humbled mistress, and I the condescending protector.

[Page 174]
BRUTON. An enviable state, truly, you project for yourself!
ROBINAIR. And Arden, too; he must in his turn give place, and bend his blushing brow to mortification and contempt.
BRUTON. A blessed sight to behold!
ROBINAIR. Ay, and that proud boy of his, who begins already, like his lofty mother, to bear himself with a spirit above his years, even he must crouch and hold his tongue in humbling consciousness.
BRUTON. And thus circumstanced, you propose to be happy. Why, the fiends themselves enjoy as good happiness as this; and if such be your notion of enjoyment, Robinair, you need not be afraid of joining company with them hereafter, for you will certainly have served your time here as a noviciate of their order.
ROBINAIR. Well, if I do take that road to preferment, I sha'n't have the regret of breaking up my intimacy with thee.

[Page 175]
BRUTON. Nay, I know not that. I am disgusted with this way of life, I assure you, and have very [75]   serious thoughts of reforming my bad habits.
ROBINAIR. Reforming, ha! ha! ha! Why, what's the matter with thee? Hast thou got gout in thy head, or water in thy chest; or has thy good-natured physician threatened thee with apoplexy? Ha! ha! I am concerned to enquire into this matter, thou knowest, as thou intendest most certainly to make me thine executor.
BRUTON. No, Robinair, I have none of the diseases you mention, nor any other, that I know of; but no one knows how long he may enjoy either health or life.
ROBINAIR (with mock solemnity). To be sure, nobody knows how soon his glass may be run. Nobody knows when death may knock at his own door—we are all here to-day, but know not where we may be to-morrow. I have heard all this twenty years ago, from a much better preacher than thou art.—Come, come, let us go into the house again: our cool tankard is waiting for us.
BRUTON. As you please: but here comes your man from town.

[Page 176]
Enter Morgan . Returned from thy watching post, Morgan?
MORGAN. Yes, Sir.
ROBINAIR. And with any intelligence?
MORGAN. [100]   I have kept my station there all the evening, on pretence of condoling with old Humphry, who is in grievous distress for his master; but I know not that I have picked up any thing particular.
BRUTON. What has the lady been doing, Morgan?
ROBINAIR (eagerly). Yes, what of her? Was she at home, or at the prison?
MORGAN. She returned from the prison for an hour or two in the evening, and, after writing some letters, as they told me, or such-like business as that, returned to the prison again, where, she said to Humphry, she should stay till a late hour, desiring Robert to come with a chair for her.
ROBINAIR. Not the chariot?—This really looks—but
[Page 177]
But art thou sure the chariot is not ordered afterwards?
BRUTON. You would fain have the poor fellow to assist you in deceiving yourself.—Or did you not hear, Morgan, that it is suspected she will come round in her chair by Chelsea, on her way from the prison?
MORGAN. No, Sir; I heard little of her intentions, they were all so taken up, before I came away, about young master.
ROBINAIR. And what of him? What has he been doing?
MORGAN. After spending a long time in the closet where [125]   Mr. Arden keeps his arms, he has left the house without speaking to any one, and unseen by any body; and all the servants, particularly Humphry, are in a terrible quandary about him; for he had not returned when I came away, and they fear some mischief has befallen him.
ROBINAIR. Much disturbance about nothing, talking fools! They like to be frightened about something: it is an occupation for them, and does not hinder them from eating their supper.

[Page 178]
MORGAN. Nay, Sir; not a morsel has been eaten by them: for they all love the poor youth as if he were kith and kin to every one of them.
BRUTON. He is, indeed, a fine-spirited creature. In his father's closet, said you?
ROBINAIR. And are any of the arms missing?
MORGAN. Humphry says a light fowling-piece is gone; but he is not sure that Mr. Arden himself did not take it some time ago to be cleaned.
ROBINAIR. And the old fool is afraid the child will blow out his brains with it.—Well, since thou hast no other intelligence than this, Morgan, go thy ways to thy supper. [Exit Morgan .] And let us move into the house also. See, the candles are lighted now in the parlour, and our cool tankard [150]   waits for us.
BRUTON. With all my heart: we have been in this chill air long enough.
                                         [Exeunt into the house.
[Page 179]
Enter Young Arden , with a fowling-piece in his hand, stepping cautiously, and then looking round, as if disappointed. YOUNG ARDEN. He has got into the house already. After watching here since twilight, I have suffered him to escape. Wretched timidity! though his friend stood so near him, I am marksman enough to have been in no danger of killing the wrong person. Foolish, cruel caution! must I return to my father again, and no deliverance gained? I will not return! Here will I watch till the morning, and shoot him in the light of day.—I will not return again to shame, and disgrace, and misery, and despair. (Observing light from the window, and Robinair and Bruton , who make their appearance within, and sit down at a table, on which are some refreshments.) Ha! yonder he is again! Now is my time. (Raising his arm.) Hand, hand, be thou strong and steady! heart, be thou firm! The life of my father is in the exertion of a moment. And Thou, great Father of all! wilt thou pardon this act? Wilt Thou pity me? Wilt Thou have mercy on me? O, have mercy! have mercy! though I dare not pray to thee! (Goes nearer to the window, and points his gun, when Bruton within changes his position, and comes upon a line with Robinair .)
[Page 180]
Nay, this must not be: I must not take two lives at once,—the innocent with the guilty. [175]   (After a pause.) There is a window at the end of the room, looking to the beech walk; I'll fire in at that.
                                         [Exit, making his way hastily through shrubs and bushes, which knock off his hat as he goes out. Presently the report of a gun is heard, and Robinair within is seen to fall. Great commotion of Servants rushing into the room, and aiding Bruton to give him assistance, &c. &c. Soon after Morgan and others issue from the house to give the alarm. MORGAN. Holla! holla! you who pass there! Murder! murder! There is murder committed here; and we demand of every body in the king's name to give us assistance.
Enter two Men by a wicket gate. FIRST MAN. Murder! where? who?
MORGAN. In the house yonder! my master!
SECOND MAN. We heard the report of fire-arms. Was it then?

[Page 181]
MORGAN. Yes, and the murderer can be but a little way off. Assist us in securing him.
SERVANT. There is a breach in the hedge at the end of that walk: he will escape that way if we are not quick. Let somebody come with me, for I cannot grapple with a ruffian single-handed.
FIRST MAN (looking in at the window). Ay, there lies the body within, as stark as any corse, upon a board.
MORGAN. For God's sake, don't think of satisfying curiosity now! Try to secure the villain first, or he will escape. Come with me in this direction; and (to Second Man ) do you follow the footman yonder, since nobody will go alone.
FIRST MAN (as they are about to disperse). Here is a hat on the grass.
OMNES (gathering round him). [200]   A hat?
SECOND MAN. Poh! it is but a boy's hat. Some varlet has come over the hedge to gather gooseberries.
MORGAN. Is there a name in it?

[Page 182]
FIRST MAN. No, there is no name; so what does it signify? I'll e'en take it home with me. It will fit my Neddy to a marvel.
MORGAN. Do what you will with it: but let us run. We lose time here.
                                         [Exeunt different ways. SCENE II. The hall in Arden's house. Enter Madaline and Robert . MADALINE. It grows very late; did not the clock strike now?
ROBERT. Yes, Madam; twelve and the quarter after.
MADALINE. I know not what to do, Robert: your poor mistress is in a terrible state of anxiety.
ROBERT. Yes, poor lady! I have listened for this half hour to her steps pacing backwards and forwards
[Page 183]
in her own room, and it has gone to my heart to hear it. I'd give the best suit I ever had to my back, that my young master were returned.
MADALINE. Humphry is a long time gone.
ROBERT. An hour and twenty minutes.
MADALINE. Only an hour and twenty minutes! But you have reckoned the time with a more composed mind than we have done: perhaps you may be right.
ROBERT. My watch has reckoned it, Madam, which is more composed than any of us.
MADALINE. Would he were returned!
ROBERT. Shall I go after him?
MADALINE. That would do no good. Open the street door, and listen if there be any footsteps coming. ( Robert opens the door and listens.) Do you hear any thing?
ROBERT. [25]   Yes, I do hear footsteps.

[Page 184]
MADALINE. Light steps like those of a boy?
ROBERT (without side of the door). No, Ma'am; mighty heavy steps: but they are Humphry's, I believe.
MADALINE. Ah! then he brings no good tidings. Do you hear no one coming after him? Is he alone?
ROBERT. No one, Ma'am; he is alone.
MADALINE. Then he has not found him; where can he possibly have gone to?—Humphry, I hope, has not told his mistress of his having been in his father's closet before he went out, and his suspicions about the fowling-piece.
ROBERT. He has not; and, indeed, he thinks now that the fowling-piece was carried to the gunsmith's some little time ago.
MADALINE. Humphry must be at hand now. Call to him.
ROBERT (thrusting his head again out at the door). Holla! holla, there!—It is him, Madam; he answers me.

[Page 185]
Enter Mrs. Arden , running eagerly. MRS. ARDEN. What voices are those at the door? Is he returned?
MADALINE. Humphry is returned.
MRS. ARDEN. And alone?—O God! some mischief has befallen him. He would not have staid so late, to make me miserable. He never before,—even in his play, he was always considerate for me; [50]   and would he now, when all this misery is upon me—O, no! some mischief has befallen him.
MADALINE. Be more calm, my dear aunt, and hear what Humphry has to tell us. He is just at the door.
Enter Humphry . MRS. ARDEN (running to meet him). Have you seen him?
HUMPHRY. No, Madam.
MRS. ARDEN. Have you heard of him?
HUMPHRY. No, Madam.

[Page 186]
MRS. ARDEN. Nor seen any one who has seen him or heard of him?
HUMPHRY. No, Madam. I have been everywhere in search of him, and have enquired of everybody I have met, but can learn nothing of him. There is scarcely a creature now upon the streets but the watchman, and you can hear his heavy steps dumping upon the pavement a quarter of a mile off.
MRS. ARDEN (rushing towards the door). I'll go myself.
MADALINE (holding her back). Alas! what can you do by going out? The night is dark, and you will meet with nothing but disappointment, perhaps insult.
MRS. ARDEN. Let me meet with what I may, I will go; I will not be withheld. No night is dark to a mother who is in search of her son. What is insult to me? I shall be strong; I shall fear [75]   nothing.
HUMPHRY. Indeed, indeed, my dear Madam, you will wander about to no purpose: and if my young master should return while you are gone, we shall have him running out again after you, like
[Page 187]
a mad creature. Be persuaded to stay here: he will break his heart when he misses you, and finds only us to receive him.
MADALINE. Yes, Humphry says right. Do return to your chamber. (Leading her gently away.) Humphry will be upon the watch, and give you notice when he comes.
MRS. ARDEN. I cannot, I cannot! I'll walk up and down here. I shall go mad if I return to my chamber. (Walks rapidly backwards and forwards; at last a knock is heard at the door, and she runs to it.) It is he! it is he!
Enter Young Arden . My son! my son! thank God I have thee again! Long, long have I watched for thee: I have been distracted with fear. Has accident,— has illness detained thee?
YOUNG ARDEN. No, mother; I am here now.
MRS. ARDEN. Yes, thou art here now; and I would not have thee from me again for a world's wealth told ten times over. (Looking earnestly at him.) But where hast thou been? Thou art wonderfully
[Page 188]
pale and spent. Hast thou come along [100]   thus through the night? Where is thy hat?
YOUNG ARDEN. Upon my head, is it not?
MRS. ARDEN. No, my love: hast thou been wandering bare-headed in the night air?
YOUNG ARDEN (putting his hand to his head). I knew not that I was so.
HUMPHRY. My dear young Sir, what way came you? I have been in search of you everywhere.
YOUNG ARDEN. I can't tell. I ran straight forward from it, through every open lane and passage that I saw; and here I am at last.
MRS. ARDEN. Straight forward from what? Did any thing pursue thee?
YOUNG ARDEN. (in a quick altered voice). Yes, something did.—Have you any wine at hand, good Humphry? I am almost wild with faintness.
MRS. ARDEN. Alas! I think thou art.

[Page 189]
HUMPHRY. Did you say wine, Sir, which you dislike so much?
YOUNG ARDEN. Never mind, never mind; give me a good draught, though there were arsenic in it.
MRS. ARDEN. Oh! thou art not well. Run, Madaline, and fetch him some cordial. [Exeunt Madaline and Humphry different ways.] O what is the matter with thee? Where hast thou been? Thou wentest out to seek deliverance for us, [125]   and the rebuff of some cruel-hearted man sends thee back broken-hearted and hopeless to me and to thy miserable father.
YOUNG ARDEN (his eyes lighting up keenly). No, mother; I do not so return. I have kept my word with you: my father's deliverance is earned.
MRS. ARDEN. And dost thou tell me so with a joy so wild and so terrible?
YOUNG ARDEN. Hush, hush, hush! Speak not to me; look not at me; tell it to no one; be as if you knew it not. Say in your own heart, “He shall live but lock it up there unuttered.

[Page 190]
MRS. ARDEN. Dear child! thy words strangely perplex me. But here is the wine. Re-enter Humphry with wine. Take a good draught of it, and then go to rest.— But will you not eat something? (He shakes his head.) Well, then, I will not urge thee.
HUMPHRY (filling up a glass with wine). Here, my young Sir, and may it do you good; but I fear it will fly to your head, as you are not used to it.
YOUNG ARDEN (having swallowed the wine hastily). No, it will not: I may take any thing now.
Re-enter Madaline with a phial. MRS. ARDEN. We had better not give him too many things at once. Go to your chamber, Edmond, and sleep will restore you.
YOUNG ARDEN. Sleep! Ay, if I could sleep.—Will you remove [150]   the light?
MRS. ARDEN. Not if you desire to have it left.
HUMPHRY. My dear boy! something has scared you.
[Page 191]
I'll leave the light in your room; and shall I sit by you?
YOUNG ARDEN (eagerly). Do so, good Humphry! that is very kind in thee.—And so, dearest mother, don't come with me, but let me pass to my chamber and lie down. (Hurrying away.)
MRS. ARDEN. And wilt thou not let me bless thee ere thou goest?
YOUNG ARDEN (returning to her). Thy blessing, my mother! (After receiving her embrace, he kisses her hand fervently.) If Heaven bless what thou blessest, I shall have nothing to fear.
MRS. ARDEN. And dost thou fear any thing?
YOUNG ARDEN. No; nothing, when I look upon you. Good night! good night!
                                         [Exit, hurrying from her, and followed by Humphry . MADALINE (observing Mrs. Arden , who remains for some time lost in thought). My dear Mrs. Arden! what is your mind fixed upon so intently? Now that he is safely returned and gone to bed, take some care of yourself.
[Page 192]
Let me entreat you to take some nourishment, and lie down for a few hours. Remember you must go in the morning to Mr. Arden, that you may see him before he goes to court; and the trial begins early.
MRS. ARDEN (starting from her reverie). [175]   True; it is still night: it is not the hour yet.
MADALINE. It is still night. I am begging of you to take some refreshment and go to bed, as you must be up early in the morning; and what you have to go through to-morrow, requires more strength than, I fear, you possess. Do you hear me?
MRS. ARDEN. Yes, Madaline. I heard you speak; I knew you spoke kindly to me, but I knew not what you said.
MADALINE. Let me go with you then to your room; and cheer up a little. All may yet go well.
MRS. ARDEN. O, if that be! if all indeed go well, I shall soon cheer up.
                                         [Exeunt, Madaline supporting her as they retire.
[Page 193]
ACT V. SCENE I. — Bruton's Lodgings. Bruton and his friend, a Justice of the Peace, are discovered in earnest conversation. JUSTICE. And you decidedly say your suspicions rest not on Arden.
BRUTON. Decidedly. There is not one trait in the character of the man that should raise in my mind the slightest suspicion; nor even any circumstance regarding him of any kind, his interest in the death of the deceased only excepted.
JUSTICE. Did you not hint at another person whom you do suspect?
BRUTON. I know a man whose fortune Robinair has ruined, whose sister he has seduced and abandoned, and whom I believe to be capable of executing the fellest revenge; yet, as I have no actual evidence to support my suspicions, you must not receive them from me as any kind of information to be acted upon. It were hard,
[Page 194]
indeed, if the injuries he has received were alone made the cause of more injuries.
Enter a Servant. BRUTON. What do you want? I am at present engaged.
SERVANT. One of Mr. Robinair's servants is below, Sir; and a poor labouring man is along with him, who found a hat last night on the grass-plat near the house, just after the murder was committed.
BRUTON. Show them up immediately.
                                         [Exit Servant. JUSTICE. [25]   This will probably lead to the discovery.
BRUTON. Yes; murder, the proverb says, is always found out. And, in truth, it is often discovered by circumstances that appear at the first wonderfully trifling and minute.
JUSTICE. When men commit such deeds, they do so in a state of mind which renders them incapable of perceiving what circumstances will excite or prevent suspicion; and they are as often detected from caution as from oversight.

[Page 195]
BRUTON. True: the mind in that state may be cunning; but it is a cunning which betrays oftener than conceals; like that of the poor cushat, which vainly tries to mislead a practised fowler by hovering over the bushes where her nest and her nestlings are not.
Enter Morgan and a Labourer. BRUTON. Well, Morgan, what brings you and this good man here?
MORGAN. This man, Sir, found a hat last night.
LABOURER. Ay, please your honour, just as we were all setting off after the villain that killed that there gentleman.
JUSTICE. Tell us, my good friend, in what manner you found it.
LABOURER. In no manner at all, please your honour. I [50]   only sees it on the grass, and I picks it up.
JUSTICE. Well, then, it was lying on the grass when you picked it up?

[Page 196]
LABOURER. Yes, your honour; and I'll tell you all how it was, without either meddling or making with it; though I did think there was no great harm in carrying it home to my poor boy, who has been going about bare-headed for this fortnight past, like an ouzle, with its feathers on end.
JUSTICE. Well, well; where did you find it?
LABOURER. Last night, your honour.
JUSTICE. I should call that when .
BRUTON. You puzzle him, my good Sir.
JUSTICE. No matter.— (To Labourer.) When did you find it, then?
LABOURER. Just there, too, please your honour.
BRUTON. Don't question him so methodically; but let him tell his own story first.
LABOURER (to Bruton ). Thank your honour, that is just what I means to do as soon as I can get the end of it. For
[Page 197]
you see, Sirs, as soon as I heard the gun go off, and some one a-calling out “Murder!” I guessed as how some mischief was a-doing; so I runs into the garden in no time, and just before me, on the grass, near a thicket, on this hand of me [75]   —No, no; on the other hand of me,—a yard off, belike, (for I'll tell your honours exact how it was,) I sees a black thing lying on the ground, at my feet.
JUSTICE. And near the house? about a yard from it, you say?
LABOURER. About a yard from the right or the left of me, I an't quite sure which; but, as I said, I took it for some black thing; but when I came close to it, I found it was a hat.
JUSTICE. Well, well; give us no more of thy story at present, but let us look at the hat. Is there a name in it?
LABOURER. No, your honour; and so I thought no harm to take it home to my poor boy. (Shows the hat.)
BRUTON (starting as he looks on it). Good God!

[Page 198]
JUSTICE. What, Bruton, do you recognise it?
BRUTON. I fear I do.
SERVANT (to Bruton , after examining it). It is the very same hat, Sir, that you gave in a present to young Mr. Arden, before he went last to school. I'll swear to it: I know it by the twisting of the band.
JUSTICE. This is a strong fact. Come with me, my good friends: your several evidences must be taken in a more formal manner. You seem [100]   much hurt, Bruton.
BRUTON. I am so.— (Aside.) Is it possible that the wretched boy has sacrificed himself for his father? (To the Justice .) I'll follow you presently.
JUSTICE. Nay, you must go with me now: I must not leave you behind. My duty requires me not to lose sight of you.
                                         [Exeunt.
[Page 199]
SCENE II. The Street before Arden's House. Enter Humphry , meeting Robert , who comes out from the house. ROBERT. Returned from the Court already? Is the trial over?
HUMPHRY. Ay; thank God for it! and our master is a free man again.
ROBERT (skipping about). O, rare news! rare news! Let us run and tell everybody. Acquitted,—acquitted; not guilty?
HUMPHRY. To be sure he is. How can a man be condemned when there is no evidence against him?
ROBERT. I knew it would be so; I knew he would be acquitted: I knew he had no more done it than I had done it. And yet, for all that, all last night, through my sleep, there was such a howling
[Page 200]
of a last speech in my ears I could get no rest for the sound of it.
HUMPHRY. Hold thy tongue, fool! I hate to hear the very name of it. Have I not told thee already, I'll give thee a good sound beating if thou ever speak one word of such things again.—Run and take the key of the back gate and open it.
ROBERT. Why so?
HUMPHRY. Your master is coming home by a private way to avoid the crowd, and will enter by the back gate. In the mean time I'll go and inform my [25]   young master of the good news; for he must be quite overcome with despondency, poor boy, else he would never have rested quietly at home all this time. It is so unlike his usual stirring spirits.
ROBERT (calling after Humphry as he goes off). Humphry, hark ye, Humphry!
HUMPHRY (turning back). What sayest thou?
ROBERT. Did they raise a great huzza when he was acquitted; and did Master make them a low bow, and all that?

[Page 201]
HUMPHRY (pushing him off the Stage by the shoulders). Provoking fool! Run and open the back gate directly, or I'll make thee bow lower than thou hast a mind to.—He will be here in a few minutes.
                                         [Exeunt severally. SCENE III. A small Court or Garden behind Arden's House. Enter Madaline from the house. MADALINE (looking about). I thought Edmond would have been here before me. What can make the child so still and inert at such a moment as this. My aunt need not have urged me to remain here to comfort him, I trow: he has kept himself out of the way of every body.
Enter Humphry . MADALINE. Come near me, good Humphry; there is a thing I should have asked at thee sooner: did your Master know nothing of Robinair's death, till after he came into the Court?

[Page 202]
HUMPHRY. No, not a whisper of it, till the witnesses on the side of the prosecution were called for.
MADALINE. And how did he look when he heard it?
HUMPHRY. So astonished, at first, that his face became pale with astonishment; and one would have believed it was a witness on his own side that was lost. But soon after, I warrant ye, there was a wonderful change in his behaviour.
MADALINE. How so?
HUMPHRY. Why, now, to make it clear to you, Ma'am; seeing him before he heard it, and seeing him afterwards, was, according to my notion, like seeing a man crossing over a river lately frozen, with his half-bended body, picking a step here, [25]   and picking a step there, while the ice is bending and cracking round him on every side, and then seeing him when he gets fairly to the shore, lifting up his head, looking round him again, and standing upright and firmly on his legs, like a pillar.
MADALINE. And Mrs. Arden—how did she receive the news of his acquittal? It grieved me not to be
[Page 203]
with her; but she had beseeched me so earnestly to remain here with her son, that I was constrained to obey her.
HUMPHRY. I thought so, Ma'am; for in truth she wanted a friend to be with her very much.
MADALINE. Ah! I fear she did. How was it, Humphry?
HUMPHRY. I carried her the news myself. Three steps brought me from the Court to the room where she waited; and had I been threescore and ten, I should not, I believe, have made more of them.
MADALINE. And how did she receive it?
HUMPHRY. O! fainted away like a corse.
MADALINE. Indeed! O, that I had been with her! Did you tell her of Robinair's death, too?
HUMPHRY. Yes, Ma'am, after she was somewhat recovered, I told her; but I had as lief have held my [50]   tongue.
MADALINE. Why so, my good Humphry?

[Page 204]
HUMPHRY. Truly, I thought she would have been glad on't, knowing so well that she disliked the man for drawing in her poor husband into so many ruinous courses; but, contrarywise, she looked terrified when she heard it, and has worn a face of a marvellous thoughtful, gloomy cast ever since.—But here comes the coach up the lane. (Listening.) They will be here in a trice.
MADALINE. And Edmond not yet come down to receive them: how strange! I thought an arrow from the bow would not have been swifter than he to meet his father. Indeed I wondered much that he did not rouse himself to attend his mother this morning; but his remissness now is astonishing. —The carriage comes no nearer.
HUMPHRY (listening). No; it is not them. It has turned into another lane; and Mr. Edmond will be down stairs before they come.
MADALINE. I hope so. Who would have thought such a brave, spirited boy would have been so deeply depressed with misfortune?
HUMPHRY. I have my own notions about that.

[Page 205]
MADALINE. Your own notions?
HUMPHRY. [75]   Don't look frightened, Madam. I watched by him last night, after his return, and from his tossings and restlessness, and some strange words which he uttered, as if in a kind of agony, once or twice, I shrewdly suspect the poor boy was at a fortune-teller's, to enquire about his father's doom, and that he was frightened with some horrid sight or other.
MADALINE. Think you so?
HUMPHRY I am almost sure of it. Those cursed hags make people run mad sometimes with the sights they raise up before them.
MADALINE. I have heard of such things in the country, in days gone by, but now—
HUMPHRY. But the days of London wickedness never go by; and if they have unsettled the brain of that noble boy, burning at the stake is too good for them.
MADALINE. Nay, you are savage.

[Page 206]
HUMPHRY. Oh, Ma'am! had you heard what I heard! He gave one groan so deep and so terrible, that I started up and pulled the coverlet off him, to see whether there was not a man under it, so impossible it seemed that a boy should have strength to utter such a sound.
MADALINE. [100]   And did you question him?
HUMPHRY. I tried to do it, Ma'am; but whenever I began to speak, he looked so sternly at me that I dared not persist.—Blessed child! I never saw him look sternly on any one before.
MADALINE. And had you no conversation with him at all the whole night?
HUMPHRY. No, none. Whenever I said any thing, he covered up his face quickly with the bed-clothes, as if he were going to sleep; and so I could draw nothing from him, good or bad.
MADALINE. There is something very strange in all this: I cannot understand it.—But, hark! there comes the carriage now.

[Page 207]
HUMPHRY. Ay, it is it; I know the sound of it well. It is at hand—it stops.
                                         [Runs and opens a small gate at the bottom of the Stage, and enter Arden and Mrs. Arden , who both receive the embraces of Madaline .] ARDEN (looking about). So, Madaline, you are the first to meet us.— Ha! here he is.
Enter Young Arden , who runs to his father, and throwing himself upon his neck, bursts into tears. ARDEN. My son!
YOUNG ARDEN. My father!
ARDEN. Yes, Edmond, I will now, indeed, be thy father; and to be worthy of thee and of thine excellent mother, will be the business of my future life. Thy noble nature shall not be put to pain for me any more. I shall see thee virtuous [125]   and happy: that will be my portion in this world, and worth all that my folly and extravagance have deprived me of.

[Page 208]
YOUNG ARDEN. See me happy, father!—Oh, oh! be happy yourself, and think not of that.
ARDEN. How so, boy? Shalt thou not be happy?
MRS. ARDEN (taking her son's hand tenderly). Shalt thou not be happy with us, my son? Shall thy father and I, united as we may now be in sober domestic peace, not have the blessedness of seeing thee happy?
YOUNG ARDEN (with kindled animation). Yes, mother; you shall see it: you shall see me happy. I shall look upon my father and you in your domestic peace, and feel a kind of fearful happiness.
MRS. ARDEN. O! what words are these?
ARDEN. Let us go into the house. I must be alone with thee, Edmond: I must strain thee to my yearning heart in privacy.
(As they are about to go into the house, a party of men burst in upon them from the small gate, which has been left unlocked, and lay hold of Young Arden .) FIRST MAN. Stop, Sir; you are our prisoner: we take you
[Page 209]
into custody in the king's name. ( Mrs. Arden shrieks, and is supported from falling by Madaline .)
ARDEN (catching hold of his Son, to pull him from the men). You must be mistaken, friends; you can have no warrant against a boy like this!
FIRST MAN. Read there: it is our warrant against Edmond Arden, junior.
ARDEN (looking at the warrant). O God! (Rushing upon the men.) Ye shall [150]   take my life before ye seize him!
HUMPHRY. And mine too, before you touch a hair of his head! (Brandishing his stick, and rushing furiously upon the men, who keep hold of Young Arden .)
FIRST MAN. Dare ye resist the king's officers? (Drawing a hanger from his side.)
HUMPHRY. Ay, or the devil's either! What care I for the flashing of your steel?
                                         [A violent struggle ensues between Humphry and Arden on one side, and the officers of justice on the other, in which Young Arden , between the two parties, is wounded.]
[Page 210]
YOUNG ARDEN. Oh! I am slain! Give over, dear father: fight no more for me, my brave Humphry.
                                         [A general outcry and panic; and they all close about him, Arden supporting him as he sinks to the ground, and Mrs. Arden kneeling by him distractedly.] MRS. ARDEN. Slain! O! no, no, no! Thou art wounded, love, but not slain: Heaven will not suffer such cruelty.—Run, O run for assistance immediately!
YOUNG ARDEN. My dear, dear mother! nothing can save me.
MRS. ARDEN. Say not so. No, no! thou wilt be saved.
YOUNG ARDEN. There is sure and speedy death in this wound: I feel it, and I am glad of it. Move me not from this spot; torment me not with any vain assistance, but let me quietly go where I ought to go—where I wish to go; for it is not meet that I should live.
MRS. ARDEN. No, no! thou shalt live! I will breathe my soul into thee; I will encircle thee, and grow into thee with the warm life of a mother. Death shall not tear thee from me!

[Page 211]
YOUNG ARDEN. Alas! my own dear mother! wring not your hands so wildly.
MRS. ARDEN. [175]   Wo is me! In the very blossom of thy youth! thou pride—thou flower of my bosom!
YOUNG ARDEN. How many mother's sons, not much older than me, die far distant on the ocean, on the field of battle, with many terrible wounds; and here I am beside you, mother, and shall look upon you, and keep hold of your hand till the last.—My father; where are you? Give me your hand. (Taking Arden's hand, and joining it with his wife's.) There, mother; I have earned him for you, and he will take care of you.—Will you not now be united in steady unbroken affection? This cheers me; this makes death almost pleasant to me.
ARDEN. My boy! my noble sacrificed boy! this is agony.
YOUNG ARDEN. Say not so, father! Mourn for me, but let it not be with this bitter grief. I am not sorry to die. I have, I fear, offended my great and awful Father; but I have prayed to Him to punish and forgive me. This is my punishment, and
[Page 212]
I know by it that He has heard my prayer. O may He bless and pity you when I am gone! —But there is something I must say while I can speak.
ARDEN. What is it, my love?
YOUNG ARDEN. [200]   The men that arrested me—let them come near. (To the men.) Be ye witnesses that with my dying breath I confess myself guilty of Robinair's death, and solemnly declare no creature but myself had any knowledge of it.—My strength goes fast; but this hand and this hand (pressing his father and mother's hands) are still warm in my grasp. Who else stands near who has loved me?—You, cousin, you have been very good to me; and, if I had strength, I would thank you.
MADALINE. My dear, dear Edmond! I love not my own brother better than thee: how shall I bear to think of thy sad end!
YOUNG ARDEN. And Humphry too; where art thou? Give me thine honest hand.
HUMPHRY. Oh, my dear young master! I would have laid down my life to save yours.

[Page 213]
YOUNG ARDEN. I know thou hast loved me well—better than I deserved. If I had lived to be a man, we should never have parted.—Wilt thou live with my father and mother when I am gone?—No, no! this is not right; I do not ask it. Thou wilt find some master who is able to reward thee as thou deservest.
HUMPHRY. [225]   But I will live with them! ay, beg with them —starve with them. O, pardon me! it is not want of respect that makes me speak so.—Yes, I will serve them, for your sake, as I would serve no other master on earth, were he as rich as a prince.
YOUNG ARDEN. This comes over my heart! My eyes are dark now;—lay me back a little. (Groans.) Be not unhappy if I groan somewhat. The pain—
MRS. ARDEN. Alas, my dear love! art thou in great pain?
YOUNG ARDEN. No, mother; it is killing me now, but it is not very bad. Farewell, farewell! (Dies.)
                                         [ Mrs. Arden sinks down in a state of insensibility by the body, while Arden paces about in an agony of despair.]
[Page 214]
ARDEN. Fool, fool, fool! vain, selfish, detestable fool! this is the end of thy vanity and extravagance; of thy contemptible ambition and thirst for distinction. —Thou art distinguished enough now, —the curse of Heaven is on this miserable head! (Beating his forehead, and striding across the Stage; while the Curtain drops.)
NOTES
1
ARDEN
BRUTON
FIRST MAN
GAOLER
HUMPHRY
JUSTICE
LABOURER
MADALINE
MORGAN
MRS. ARDEN
OMNES
ROBERT
ROBINAIR
SECOND MAN
SERVANT
SKRIEVER
STRANGER
UNDER GAOLER
YOUNG ARDEN

Title: The stripling (1836)

Publication title: Dramas, By Joanna Baillie. In Three Volumes

Pages: 3 v.

Publication date: 1836

Publication year: 1836

Publisher/Imprint: Printed for Longman, Rees, Orme

Physical description: 3 v.

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: London

Publication subject: Literature

Source type: Book

Language of publication: English

Document type: Book, Tragedy

Document note: The stripling.; Tragedy.; Date first published: 1836.; Date first performed: Unknown or unacted.

Publication note: Preliminaries and introductory matter omitted; The following plays have been taken from this source:; From Vol. I; The Alienated Manor: a comedy. In five acts; From Vol. II; The Stripling: a tragedy. In five acts. Written in prose; Enthusiasm: a comedy. In three acts; From Vol. III; Witchcraft: a tragedy in prose. In five acts; The Homicide: a tragedy in prose, with occasional passages of verse. In three acts; The Match: a comedy. In three acts; .

Accession number: D0100064

ProQuest document ID: 2138579409

Document URL: http://libproxy.temple.edu/login?url=https://www.proquest.com/books/stripling-1836/docview/2138579409/se-2?accountid=14270

Database: Literature Online

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2022 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions